cathedral in Dublin is, for 10 points, what cathedral that shares its
name with an Oxford college founded by Cardinal Wolsey and the most
populous city on New Zealand’s South Island? Patrice {Lumumba} This
man’s life was dramatized in a popular Chinese play at the beginning
of the Cultural Revolution titled for the War Drums of a particular
place. In 1963, Ghanaian students rioted at a university named for
this man after the corpse of Edmund Asare-Addo was discovered
alongside a Moscow highway. Antoine Gizenga, this man’s deputy, ran in
a 2006 presidential election on the platform of restoring this man’s
policies. This founder of the MNC achieved his highest position under
the presidency of Joseph Kasa-Vubu. He tried to ensure Soviet aid to
prevent the secession of Katanga, but he soon had to flee to Ilebo to
raise an army against the coup of Mobutu Sese Seko; soon thereafter,
he was killed by a firing squad commanded by Belgian troops. For 10
points, name this first post-independence prime minister of the Congo,
a leftist who was promptly deposed and killed. {Yugoslavia} As World
War II ended, this country’s troops were required to stay east of the
Morgan Line. A wartime agreement among anti-Nazi groups in this
country was the short-lived Treaty of Vis. After the war ended,
Aloysius Stepinac, the leader of this country’s Bishops’ Conference,
was promptly arrested. Part of this country was declared independent
during the war by the Ustaše regime, which was brutally opposed by the
pro-monarchist Chetniks as well as the group that ultimately gained
power, the Partisans. This country’s postwar leader denounced Stalin,
got expelled from the Cominform, and co-founded the Non- Aligned
Movement. For 10 points, name this multinational country once led by
Josip Broz Tito. {Liberal} Party The alcoholic Clement Davies became
leader of this party after Archibald Sinclair lost his seat in an
election that left this party with only 12 MPs, mostly from rural
areas. This party was divided when 159 of its members were issued
“Coalition Coupons” during a khaki election. William Harcourt lost a
battle for leadership of this party to his rival, Lord Rosebery, who
led it to electoral defeat. Earlier, this party had been victorious
after its leader denounced the “Bulgarian Horrors” during the
Midlothian Campaign. The most recent prime minister from this party,
who famously called Adolf Hitler the “George Washington of Germany,”
was the only British prime minister to have spoken English as a second
language. In 1988, this party merged with the Social Democrats to form
the party currently led by Nick Clegg. David Lloyd George was the last
British prime minister who was a member of, for 10 points, what
political party that was a longtime rival of the Conservatives? {Los
Angeles} (or {LA}; accept {San Gabriel} before “Church on the Way”)
Missionaries in the area around this city were challenged by an Indian
medicine woman named Toypurina, who led a revolt here. One of the most
influential early megachurches, the Church on the Way, was founded by
Jack Hayford in a suburb of this city. Rafael Moneo designed this
city’s current cathedral to replace the Cathedral of Saint Vibiana
after the latter was damaged in a 1994 earthquake. Billy Graham was
running a revival out of circus tents in this city when William
Randolph Hearst issued his famous order to “puff Graham.” The African-
American preacher William Seymour encouraged people to speak in
tongues during a 1906 revival he led in this city on Azusa Street.
This was also the city where Aimee Semple Macpherson built the Church
of the Foursquare Gospel before her disappearance. For 10 points, name
this city whose poorer districts include Watts and Compton. {Egypt}
(or {Misr}) After Muhammad ibn Tughj was appointed governor of the
area corresponding to this present-day country in 935, he founded the
short-lived Ikhshidid dynasty, whose ruler Abu al-Misk Kafur
patronized the poet al-Mutanabbi. The city of al-Qatta’i in this
present-day country was the capital of the Tulunid dynasty, which
swore nominal fealty to the Abbasid Caliphs. ‘Amr ibn al-‘As founded
the garrison city of Fustat after the Islamic conquest of this
country, though Fustat was replaced as capital after the 969 invasion
of an Ismaili dynasty flying a solid green flag. That dynasty, which
founded the Al- Azhar mosque in this present-day country, was the
Fatimids. The Ayyubid dynasty founded by Saladin was also centered in,
for 10 points, what country invaded by Napoleon in 1798? {Imagined
Communities} The original version of this book ended by invoking
Walter Benjamin’s “Angel of History” and declaring that wars such as
the 1978-1979 conflict between China, Vietnam, and Cambodia, with
which this book opens, will recur until people think more critically
about the past. A new chapter added after the publication of this
book’s first edition, which was inspired by Thongchai Winichakul’s
research subsequently published as Siam Mapped, was titled “Census,
Map, Museum.” The most famous section of this book discusses a
“convergence of capitalism and print technology on the fatal diversity
of human language.” The title ideas of this book are the result of a
common mental image of an entity that is “both inherently limited and
sovereign.” For 10 points, name this influential theoretical study of
nationalism by Benedict Anderson. War of the {Quadruple Alliance} In
one minor engagement in this war, a force led by Francisco Cornejo
captured over 100 slaves from the colony of Nassau. One phase of this
larger war concluded with the defeat of the Duke of Ormonde at the
Battle of Glen Shiel, which marked the failure of the Alberoni Plan.
The most important military victory of this war was won by George Byng
in the Battle of Cape Passaro. The Treaty of the Hague, which ended
this war, established Savoyard control over Sardinia after Philip V
traded it for Sicily. For 10 points, name this war in which Spain’s
new Bourbon monarch tried to reverse Spain’s losses in the War of the
Spanish Succession by challenging Austria, France, the Dutch Republic,
and Great Britain. Vladimir Ilyich {Lenin} (accept Vladimir Ilyich
{Ulyanov}) The Chinese philosopher Yang Xianzhen was condemned for
promoting the idea of “Two Unites into One,” which he developed from
this thinker’s comment that “One divides into two.” This thinker also
defended his role in contentious conferences in London and Brussels in
One Step Forward, Two Steps Back, which was written after the
beginning of his rivalry with Julius Martov. A Nikolai Chernyshevsky
novel inspired the title of his pamphlet about the importance of
forming a vanguard, What Is To Be Done? He wrote about how European
powers used monopolies within their colonies to sustain capitalism in
Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism, and he argued in the
April Theses for carrying out what became known as the October
Revolution. For 10 points, name this leader of the Bolsheviks.
{Maldives} This country’s Hukuru Mosque commemorates its conversion to
Islam by Abu al-Barakat, who was interested in this country because of
its booming trading economy based on selling cowrie shells. Omar I
initially refused to let Ibn Battuta leave this country after
appointing him chief qadi, in which capacity Ibn Battuta raged against
the number of women not wearing enough clothing until everybody got
sick of him and asked him to move on. In the 20th century, this
country was long led by the dictator Maumoon Abdul Gayoom, who sparked
civil unrest in 2005 by arresting the main opposition figure, Mohamed
Nasheed. Nasheed’s own career as president ended in February 2012,
allegedly at gunpoint, but Nasheed is best known in the West for
fighting against global warming because rising sea levels threaten to
drown this country. For 10 points, name this island country in the
Indian Ocean whose capital is Male. the {Cold War} In the introduction
to the expanded edition of a book about the “Arab” kind of these
events, Malcolm Kerr memorably compared the Six-Day War to a football
game between Notre Dame and Princeton. The Woodrow Wilson
International Center for Scholars organizes an “International History
Project” of this event, which is notably studied by the likes of James
Hershberg, Nigel Ashton, and Melvyn Leffler. The “revisionist” school
of historiography of this event, which included William A. Williams
and Thomas Paterson among its members, was also advanced by Walter
LaFeber, who argued that it was rooted in 19th-century conflicts in
trade in East Asia. Odd Arne Westad argued for a focus on the Third
World in his “Global” history of it. We Now Know titled a 1997 essay
on this conflict by the Yale professor most famous for studying it.
John Lewis Gaddis also wrote a “new” history of, for 10 points, what
conflict said to have ended in 1989? Jean-Jacques {Dessalines} (or
Emperor {Jacques} I) A 1986 study by Jan Pachonski and Reuel K. Wilson
discusses how this man became fascinated by conscripted Polish
soldiers invading his country, came to see them as similar victims,
and thus treated them better than other invaders, sparing many of them
when he ordered that all white men in his country should be
slaughtered. Alexandre Pétion and Henri Christophe were among those
who plotted the conspiracy to assassinate this man at Pont Larnage.
Along with François Capois, he had led the troops that overwhelmed the
soldiers of Donatien de Rochambeau at the Battle of Vertière, which
ended Napoleon’s invasion of his country. Previously, he had also won
the Battle of Crête-à-Pierrot as the top military assistant to
Toussaint L’Ouverture. For 10 points, name this first emperor of an
independent Haiti. John {Glenn} Joining the Marine Air Corps in WWII,
he earned two Distinguished Flying Crosses in the Pacific, winning two
more in the Korean War. He became a test pilot, and is credited with
the first transcontinental supersonic flight. In 1959, he was named
one of the seven first-generation American astronauts, and in 1962, in
Friendship 7, was the first American to orbit the earth. FTP, name
this pilot, astronaut, and politician from Ohio who will soon go into
orbit once again. {Photoelectric effect} It was discovered by accident
by Heinrich Hertz in 1887 while he was generating electromagnetic
waves and observing their propagation. According to the classical wave
theory of light, the intensity of the light determines the amplitude
of the wave, and so a greater light intensity should cause the
electrons on the metal to oscillate more violently and to be ejected
with a greater kinetic energy. However, the experiment showed that the
kinetic energy of the ejected electrons depends only on the frequency
of the light. FTP, what is this effect which was explained in 1905 by
Albert Einstein? The {Rime of the Ancient Mariner} The title character
detains one of three young men on their way to a wedding feast, and
mesmerizes him with the story of his youthful experience at sea. As
penance for a destructive act, the title character wanders the world
recounting his story, which includes the deaths of his fellow sailors,
his suffering, and his eventual redemption. FTP, identify this poem
that contains the line "Water, water, everywhere, Nor any drop to
drink." {Sun Yat-sen} (or Sun Wen) After a failed plot to seize the
buildings of the provincial government, he fled to Japan. There, he
formulated his political platform, the Three People's Principles:
People's Nationalism, People's Democracy, and People's Livelihood. He
was in the United States at the time of the Wuchang revolt, and when
he arrived back in China was offered and accepted the post of
provisional president of the Chinese Republic. FTP, name this Chinese
statesman, founder of the Guo Min Dang party, considered as the father
of his country. {Cubism} The Analytical stage dealt with the
simultaneous representation of various aspects of the same object. The
Synthetic stage resented larger and more varied planes. The first
exhibition of this art movement took place in 1907 in Paris, and it
can be generally characterized as a reduction of figures to their
basic geometric forms. FTP, what is this art movement whose proponents
included the poets Apollinaire and Gertrude Stein, as well as the
painters Georges Braque and Pablo Picasso? {William Tell} A native of
Uri, he refused obeisance to Gessler, the Austrian Bailiff. He killed
Gessler, setting off the revolt that ousted the bailiffs. His actions
led in to the formation of the Everlasting League among the forest
cantons of Uri, Schwyz, and Unterwalden. FTP, identify this legendary
Swiss hero whose exploits are recounted in an opera by Rossini. John
{Hancock} Born in 1737 in Braintree, Massachusetts, from 1769-1774 he
was a member of the Massachusetts general court. He became popular
with the radicals, although he was no a brilliant or inspiring leader.
Although he aspired to be commander-in-chief, he lost of Washington.
FTP, who is this person that served as president of the Continental
Congress from 1775-1777? {Candide} When the title character, his
beloved Cunegonde, and his servant Cacambo, retire to a simple life on
a small farm, they discover that the secret of happiness is "to
cultivate one's own garden." In this philosophical fantasy, the title
character is a naïve person that sees and suffers such misfortunes,
that he ultimately rejects the philosophy of his tutor Doctor
Pangloss, who claims that "all is for the best in this best of all
possible worlds." FTP, what is this 1759 satire written by Voltaire?
{Olmec} They built large settlements, established elaborate trade
routes, and developed the ceremonial ball games, blood letting, and
human sacrifice that were adopted by all Meso-American civilizations
to follow. Their civilization began around 1200 BC in the steamy
jungles of Mexico's southern gulf coast, but circa 300 BC their
civilization vanished. FTP, name this first elaborate pre-Columbian
culture of Mesoamerica. The {Firebird} (or L'Oiseau de feu) The story
follows a Russian fairy tale, and includes a disappearing castle,
golden fruit, an evil magician that imprisons beautiful maidens, and a
hero to rescue the maidens. The composer was hired by Sergei Diaghilev
a few years after the composer's teacher, Rimsky-Korsakov, died. With
choreography of Fokine, dancing of Madame Fokine and Karsavina, and
designs by Bakst, it quickly became known as a masterpiece. FTP, what
is this 1910 ballet, the first significant musical work by Igor
Stravinsky? {Theseus} Among his deeds were the slaying of the
Crommyonian sow, the capture of the Marathonian bull, and the killing
of the thieves Procrustes, Sciron, and Sinis. Sometimes dubiously
described as the son of Poseidon, when he became strong enough, his
mother Aethra had him lift the stone under which his father's sword
was hidden. FTP, who is this son of Aegeus and chief hero of Attica
who slew the Minotaur? {Kiss of the Spider Woman} Valentin is a young
socialist revolutionary. His companion, Molina, is a middle-aged
homosexual who passes the long hours by acting out scenes from his
favorite movies. At the end of their six-month prison term in an
Argentine jail cell, their roles are reversed, with Molina dying as a
result of his involvement in politics while Valentin escapes the pain
of torture by retreating into a dream world. FTP, identify this novel
by Manuel Puig turned into a Broadway musical. John {Locke} He opposed
the rationalist belief in innate ideas, holding that the mind is born
a blank slate upon which all knowledge is inscribed in the form of
human experience. Contradicting Hobbes, he maintained that the
original state of nature was happy and that all human beings were
equal and free to pursue "life, health, liberty, and possessions."
FTP, who is this English philosopher and founder of empiricism?
Giovanni Giacomo {Casanova} Suspected by the Inquisition, he fled
Venice in 1749, traveling to Lyon, Paris, Dresden, Prague, and Vienna.
On his return to Venice, he was arrested on suspicion of being a
Freemason and magician, and was cast into the Piombi, the state
prison. In his Histoire de ma fuite he describes his ingenious escape
from this prison. He is best known for his Histoire de ma vie, or
History of my Life, which protrays him as a man devoid of moral
principles and a seducer of women. FTP, who is this Italian
adventurer? Petrarch (or Francesco Petrarca) Humanist ideals inspired
his poem Africa, as well as his historical works, but his
autobiographical work Secretum meum describes some of his conflicting
ideals. He was a stubborn advocate of the continuity between classical
culture and the Christian message. After his father's death in 1326,
he moved to Avignon, taking minor ecclesiastical orders. FTP, this
marked the beginning period of what scholar's chaste love for a woman
known now only as Laura? {Babitt} He is a prosperous real-estate
broker in a Midwestern town. A pillar of his community, a civic
booster, and a believer in achieving success for its own sake, when
his best friend is arrested for shooting his own wife, he begins to
question and rebel against some of the values that he has always
upheld. FTP, who is this resident of Zenith whose name is synonymous
with adherence to a materialistic, anti-intellectual way of life, the
title character of a novel by Sinclair Lewis? {Electronegativity}
Metals generally have low values, while nonmetals have relatively high
values. Within the periodic table of elements, it generally increases
from left to right and decreases top to bottom. When atoms react with
each other, they "compete" for the electrons involved in a chemical
bond. According to this concept, each kind of atom has a certain
attraction for the electrons involved in a chemical bond. The atom
with a higher value will "pull" electrons away from the atom that has
a lower value. FTP, what is this concept for which fluorine has the
greatest value? {Iraq} A part of the Ottoman Empire during WWI, it was
conquered by the British. After the war, the European powers created
it as a British mandate. The Arabic name for Mesopotamia, an Arabian
noble, Faisal, was made its king. FTP, name this nation that became
independent in 1932, with its capital at Baghdad. Toni {Morrison} Born
Chloe Anthony Wofford, her first book, published in 1970, was The
Bluest eye. Another novel, Sula, focused on the dynamics of friendship
and the expectations for conformity within the black community. She
first gained national attention with the 1977 work Song of Solomon.
FTP, who is this recipient of the 1993 Nobel Prize for Literature, the
author of such works as Tar Baby and Beloved? Frederick {Douglass  }
He adopted his surname from the hero of Sir Walter Scott's Lady of the
Lake. After Reconstruction, he served as American minister to Haiti.
During the Civil War, he helped recruit black troops into the Union
army, with his own son serving in the first black regiment. FTP, name
this celebrated orator that founded the abolitionist newspaper the
North Star. Felix {Mendelssohn} Identify the following compositions by
P.D.Q. Bach. Just kidding. Instead, identify the following composers
in the Romantic period from works on a ten- five basis.  1st 10 -
Fingal's Cave, the Scotch Symphony  1st 5 - An overture to
Shakespeare's A Midsummer Night's Dream, a revival of Bach's St.
Matthew Passion {Binomial} Distribution This kind of distribution
describes a total number of successes produced in a succession of n
Bernoulli trials but not their order. Given n trials with k successes
with a probability p of success and a probability q of failure, the
distribution is n choose k times p to the k times q to the n minus k.
Charles {TOWNSHEND} When William Pitt the Elder became severely ill in
1766, it was this man who assumed effective control of the
administration. He died himself in 1767 amidst criticism of his last
official act, which he estimated would produce an insignificant forty
thousand pounds for the British treasury, but which shrewder observers
prophesied would lead to the loss of the American Colonies. For ten
points name this Chancellor of the Exchequer who put forth a series of
four acts in 1767 which imposed revenue duties on items necessary to
the colonists, including tea. {MACKIE MESSER} or {MACK THE KNIFE} or
{MACHEATH} Schmul Meier was reported missing, and his cash box was
acquired by this man, who walks the embankment nonchalantly impressed
that Jenny Towler turned up lately with a knife stuck through her
breast. He isn't asked and doesn't know about the ghastly fire in Soho
which killed seven children. For ten points, name this hit man who
victimized the above, married Polly Peachum and then ran off with his
old flame Lucy in Brecht and Weill's 'Threepenny Opera.' Amebic
{DYSENTERY} or intestinal {AMEBIASIS} The motile trophozoite form of
Entamoeba histolytica causes this disease, whose symptoms are fever,
frequent, bloody bowel movements, dehydration, hemorrhaging of the
gastrointestinal tract, and, if not treated with emetine or diodoquin,
death. The cyst form of the parasite allows it to live in a dormant
state in water into which it is passed through human fecal material,
where it is ingested by those who drink the water or ingest infected
food. For ten points name this disease typically found in unsanitary
prisoner-of-war camps, especially those in tropical  climates. Franz
Josef {HAYDN} After his burial in 1809, his friend Joseph Rosenbaum
dug up his body, cut off the head, and sold it to a group of Viennese
phrenologists. On his deathbed, Rosenbaum confessed the crime and left
the skull to the Viennese Society of the Friends of Music, not
realizing that his doctor had stolen the head and willed it to a
pathological museum. After a long debate, Prince Paul Esterhazy
finally persuaded everyone that the head belonged with the body of,
for ten points, what composer of the Paris and London Symphonies?
{GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT} or {GDP} Divide a nation's defense costs by
this indicator, and a standard measure of the military burden is
obtained. Its nominal value accounts for inflation, while the real
value factors out inflation using a deflating price index whose four
components are consumption, investment, government purchases and net
exports. Intermediate goods are not counted, nor is output produced by
Americans in foreign countries, but goods produced by foreigners in
the U.S. are included in, for ten points, what economic quantity which
measures the goods and services produced in a  specific period of time
in the U.S.? Old {FATHER WILLIAM} (accept the first line ÒYou are old,
Father WilliamÓ) At one time he feared that standing on his head would
injure his brain, but no longer thinks he has any brain to injure. In
his youth, he kept his limbs supple with ointment, which enables him
to now turn somersaults despite having grown very fat. By studying the
law and arguing each case with his wife, his jaws gained a lasting
muscular strength which enabled him to eat a goose, bones, beak, and
all. For ten points, identify this elderly subject of a poem which
Alice recites to the Caterpillar in "Alice in Wonderland." {MOSSES
FROM AN OLD MANSE} In it, one can find 'The Hall of Fantasy,' and 'The
Intelligence Office,' as well as 'Mrs. Bullfrog,' 'The Old Apple-
Dealer,' 'The New Adam and Eve,' and 'The Artist of the Beautiful.'
For ten points, one can also find 'Monsieur du Miroir,' 'Young Goodman
Brown' and ÔRappaccini's Daughter' in what 1846 short story collection
by Nathaniel Hawthorne, the title of which was taken after his
Concord, Massachusetts home? Lev Davidovich {LANDAU} A 1962 car
accident left him unconscious for six weeks; he was declared
clinically dead several times but somehow revived, although he was
never again able to perform creative work. He had been imprisoned
during the Stalin era but was freed by a personal intervention by his
friend Pyotr  Kapitsa, who had made the discovery that liquid helium
was superfluid. For ten points name this man who won the 1962 Nobel
Prize in Physics for his explanation of the theory behind Kapitsa's
discovery, the author of the nine- volume Course of Theoretical
Physics with former student E.M.  Lifshitz. Jean {HARLOW} or Harlean
{CARPENTIER} On her wedding night in 1932, she found her husband, who
possessed a tiny, ineffectual sex organ, pleading with her 'You're a
sex goddess \-- you can help me!' When she couldn't, Paul Bern bit her
legs badly and beat her unconscious with a cane, causing permanent
damage to her internal organs. During the filming of 'Saratoga' in
1937, she collapsed in Clark Gable's arms and died four days later of
uremic poisioning because her mother tried to heal her with simple
prayer. For ten points name this 'Platinum Venus' who starred in
'Bombshell,' 'Hell's Angels' and 'Dinner at Eight.' They had {STOLEN
HIS THUNDER}  (accept variations of tense and person) In 1709, John
Dennis wrote and produced a play called "Appius and Virginia," for
which he invented a new way of creating atmospheric sound effects by
rattling a sheet of tin. Despite the sound effects, his play was
poorly received and closed after only a few performances. A few days
later, while watching a production of "Macbeth," to his outrage he
realized that his tin sheet was being used to simulate stormy weather.
Dennis jumped up and made an accusation that has added, for ten
points, what phrase to the English language? {NEUTRINO}s They are the
subject of John Updike's poem, "Cosmic Gall," in which he berates them
as "crass" for passing nonchalantly through everything on Earth.
Actually, physicists are concerned because it seems that not as many
pass through their detectors as expected. It may be that the sun's
core is cooler than we think, or it may be that these particles have
some rest mass and oscillate between electron, muon, and tau
varieties. For ten points, identify these objects first proposed by
Wolfgang Pauli to explain energy loss in beta decay. {BERSERKER}s (do
not accept ÒAndy WangÓ) It is likely that they were members of the
cult of Odin, as Odin often assumed the form of an animal, and the
name Odin itself derives from a word meaning "fury." In illustrations
they are often shown wearing the skins and heads of wolves or bears,
but with human hands and feet. They were employed as shock troops by
King Harald and King Halfdan, but in general they were disliked and
often appear as villains in Norse sagas. For ten points, identify
these shield-biting warriors who fought while in the throes of a
murderous rage. the {SOCCER WAR} (also accept: {Guerra de Futbol}) The
real cause of the war was that 300,000 Salvadorans who had migrated to
Honduras were threatened with involuntary repatriation and were
reportedly being mistreated. Also, an inequality of population density
led El Salvadorans to envy thousands of acres of unused Honduras land
which lay just across the river. However, for ten points, what war
that lasted for two weeks and cost several thousand lives in the
summer of 1969 began hours after the two nations played the last of
three bitterly contested matches in the World Cup? {LIBIDO} This fluid
sense of eros, or life instinct, was opposed by thanatos, the death
instinct and source of destructive urges. The interaction of the two
forces produced all the variation of human activity, and psychiatric
disorder was the result of its misdirection or inadequate discharge.
Carl Jung used the term in a more expansive sense to encompass all
creative and purposive life processes in all species. For ten points
identify this concept originated by Sigmund Freud to signify the
instinctual physiological or psychic energy associated with sexual
urges. Ian Lancaster {FLEMING} As a boy, this correspondent was
handsome, intelligent, and charming, but restless and solitary; this
crack shot was expelled from Eton when his fondness for girls,
gambling and automobiles conflicted too conspicuously with school
restrictions. In a Portuguese casino, he unsuccessfully tried to ruin
German agents at chemin-de-fer, one of many personal anecdotes he
used in his novels. However, as he told an interviewer in 1963, 'One
can't go on forever having blondes and guns and so forth in the same
old mixture.' For ten points, name this author whose heart gave out
soon after the 1964 publication of 'You Only Live Twice.' John Crowe
{RANSOM} He split poetry into three strands: physical poetry about
things, Platonic poetry, which dealt with ideas, and metaphysical
poetry, which starts with things and from them generates ideas. In
1930's 'I'll Take My Stand,' he and the other Fugitives criticized the
idea that industrialization was the answer to the needs of the South,
and in 'The World's Body,' he asserted that poetry and science furnish
different but equally valid information about the world. For ten
points name this American poet and critic, whose influential 1941 work
gave a name to the 'New Criticism.' {HAIL TO THE CHIEF} The music is
attributed to a mysterious 'Mr. Sanderson,' and the oft- forgotten
words to Walter Scott in his 'The Lady of the Lake,' hence its
publication in the United States in 1812 as 'March and Chorus in the
Dramatic Romance of the Lady of the Lake.' Julia Gardiner Tyler
insisted it be played every time her husband appeared in public,
although, for ten points, what song's first presidency-related
performance was at the 1837 inauguration of Martin van Buren? the
{GULF OF ADEN} To the west, it narrows into the Gulf of Tadjourni; to
the east it is bounded by the meridian of Cape Guardafui. Its deepest
point is in the Alula- Fartak Trench. Named after a seaport on its
western end, for ten points, what deep-water basin between the coasts
of Arabia and Africa forms a natural sea link between the Red Sea and
the Arabian Sea? the {GREAT CHAIN OF BEING} Plenitude implies that
everything possible is actual. The continuity principle asserts that
each object shares at least one attribute with its neighbor, and the
linear gradation principle states that objects form a hierarchical
order from the lowest forms of existence to the ens perfectissimum.
Thus, according to Plotinus in his Enneads, the best possible world
will be one that contains the greatest possible variety of objects,
including all possible evils. For ten points name this scale of
existence popularized in the 20th century by Arthur O. Lovejoy. Oliver
{CROMWELL} Leveller Edward Essex ironically dedicated his 1657
pamphlet "Killing No Murder" to this man, calling him "the true father
of your country, for while you live we can call nothing ours, and it
is from your death that we hope for our inheritances." Although a
radical reformer in his youth, by the late 1650s he became more
conservative and regarded the Levellers as anarchists. For ten points,
name this former MP from Huntingdon whose death in 1658 did not bring
the Levellers their inheritance but instead resulted in the
restoration of Charles II three years later. (Christian Johann)
Heinrich {HEINE} Karl Marx was forever indebted to this man, who saved
the life of one of Marx's children, and, although he never cared much
for Communism, he wrote a group of harsh verses of political satire
for Marx's newspaper 'Vorwarts.' An apparently venereal disease left
him paralyzed and partially blinded for his last eight years, during
which he wrote the bleak and bitter lament on the human condition,
'Romanzero.' For ten points name this German poet best known for his
first book of love poems, the 1827 'Buch der Lieder.' Wilhelm and Karl
{LIEBKNECHT} The father was expelled from Geneva because of his
growing influence on Swiss workers. In London, he worked with Marx and
Engels, later returning to Germany was a persistent thorn in the side
of Bismarck, and eventually became a leader of the German Social
Democratic Party.  The son continued in his father's footsteps, but
was expelled from the Social Democratic Party in 1916, at which time
he met Rosa Luxemburg and with her led the anti-war group
Spartacusbund. For ten points, give the family name of these German
Socialists. {EL NINO} (also accept: {El Nino}/Southern Oscillation)
"Little Baby Jesus" was blamed for spoiling the fishing catch every
year around Christmas. It was later noticed that the effect was
especially severe at irregular intervals, and the name was reserved
only for the more anomalous episodes, when westward-blowing trade
winds weaken and warm surface water flows eastward along the equator.
For ten points, identify this effect which can cause drought in
Indonesia and Australia, but extreme rainfall and flooding along the
west coast of the Americas. Battle of {TOWTON} Lord Clifford, the Earl
of Northumberland, Sir Andrew Trollope, and Lord Scrope were all
killed, along with about 40,000 foot soldiers, half the total men
engaged in the fighting. Fought on March 29, 1461, at a spot known as
Bloody Meadow, the Yorkists under the Earl of Warwick and the Duke of
York scored a decisive victory over the Lancastrians under the Duke of
Somerset. The battle forced Henry VI to flee to Scotland and allowed
York to be crowned as Edward IV. For ten points name this battle of
the War of the Roses, the bloodiest ever fought on English soil. Luigi
{GONZAGO} In 1538, a man of this name brought about the assassination
of the Duke of Urbino, by hiring the Duke's barber-surgeon to put a
poisonous lotion in his ears. About sixty-two years later, this real
event was adapted by Shakespeare, although he transferred the name of
the murderer to the victim. For ten points, identify the unfortunate
king who is killed in the play- within-a-play staged by Hamlet in an
effort to entrap Claudius. {GALLICANS} or {GALLICANISM}  (also accept:
Four {Gallican} Articles) First, the pope has supreme spiritual but no
secular power; second, the pope is subject to ecumenical councils;
third, the pope cannot alter the immemorial customs of the French
Church; fourth, papal infallibility in doctrinal matters depends on
confirmation by the total church. These articles drafted by bishop
Jacques-Benigne Bossuet during the reign of Loius XIV expressed the
position of, for ten points, what nationalistic ecclesiastical
movement that opposed the pro-papal Ultramontanists? William J.
{SIMMONS} An unsuccessful salesman, in 1915 he became a circuit-riding
minister, preaching fire-and-brimstone sermons defending traditional
sexual morality against the forces of 'ungodly modernism.' He claimed
that a mystical vision instructed him to unite all native-born white
Protestant men in battle against 'aliens, commodity madness, political
corruption, excessive taxation and religious infidelity,' although he
was an ineffectual and waffling leader who succumbed to many of these
temptations himself. For ten points name this man who, inspired by
'Birth of a Nation,' founded the second incarnation of the Ku Klux
Klan. {Mo-ti} or {Mo-tzu} This philosopher came from the warrior class
rather than the scholarly aristocracy, and his school opposed
Confucianism by denying the validity of traditional lore. He replaced
Confucius' six graded relations with the concept of all-embracing
love, and Confucius' agnosticism with the notion of an all- loving
supreme god. Leopold {Kronecker} This Prussian mathematician said,
"God created the positive integers; all else is the work of man."
Insisting that all mathematics should be reduced to the positive
integers, he was understandably irked by Cantor and prevented Cantor
from receiving a tenured position. A delta function is named in his
honor. Kurt {Godel} It is possible to construct a universal Turing
machine because the set of all possible Turing machines is countable,
i.e. there is a unique integer for every Turing machine. The integer
corresponding to a given Turing machine is called its [blank] number,
where [blank] is the name of  this mathematician. Robert R.
{Livingston} 30-20-10 name the American historical figure.  30: On
April 30, 1789, this man, who had been secretary of the Department of
Foreign Affairs under the Articles of Confederation, administered the
oath of office to George Washington.  20: In partnership with the
inventor Robert Fulton, he received a steamboat monopoly in New York
waters. Their first successful steam vessel, which operated on the
Hudson River, was named the Clermont after this man's hometown.  10:
This Secretary to France under Thomas Jefferson rendered his most
distinguished service by, along with James Monroe, negotiating the
Louisiana Purchase. {Cinna} (Lucius Cornelius Cinna the Younger and
Gaius Helvetius Cinna, respectively) For an additional ten points,
what name is shared by two characters in Shakespeare's play "Julius
Caesar"? One of the two characters is a conspirator who cries out
"Liberty! Freedom! Tyranny is dead!" when Caesar is stabbed; the other
is an innocent poet who is mistaken for the conspirator and killed by
an angry mob. Sir {Launcelot} Identify the legendary person on a
30-20-10 basis.  30: When his mother Helen turned around to check on
her dying husband, Viviane kidnapped him and his cousins Lionel and
Bohort and raised them.  30: Among the accomplishments of this son of
King Ban are killing Turquin and Phelot, helping King Bagdemagus win
his tournament, and overthrowing Sir Gawain several times.  10: The
father of Galahad, he is best known for falling in love with Queen
Guenevere. Samuel {Foote} Almost all of this playwright and actor's
plays, such as "The Minor" and "A Trip to Calais", contain satirical
portraits of famous contemporaries, a practice which got him tried on
trumped-up charges of homosexual rape. He lost his leg after the Duke
of York goaded him into  riding a dangerous horse. Later, he wrote
several plays with "cripple" parts for himself, including "The Lame
Lover" and "The Devil Upon Two Sticks." {Xenophon} Identify the man
from works, 30/20/10:  30: "Oeconomicus", a book on estate
mananagement; and "Apology," "Symposium," and "Memorabilia," a three-
work defense of Socrates.  20: "Cyropaedia," a historical novel in
which the Persian emperor Cyrus undergoes an ideal education.  10:
"Anabasis," describing his experiences as a mercenary soldier in the
pay of Cyrus the Younger. {GERMANICUS} Caesar In 12 AD, this man was
appointed to command the Roman legion in Gaul and two legions
stationed on the Rhine. After Augustus died, his personal courage was
largely responsible for placating the troops who had mutinied in
Pannonnia, but who were put down after he dared them to kill him.
After a series of victories he was given supreme command over the
eastern provinces, but conflicted with Piso, the governor of Syria.
FTP, name this man who would have become emperor had not Piso poisoned
him, whose name is an honorific title given for his campaigns in
Germany. Charlotte Perkins {GILMAN} This great-niece of Harriet
Beecher Stowe wrote her own great novel, a feminist work entitled
ÒHerlandÓ, and the essay ÒWomen and EconomicsÓ. In 1887, she entered
the sanatorium of Dr. S. Weir Mitchell and her experience resulted in
a feminist Gothic tale later published in "The Great American Short
Stories." FTP, who is this author of "The Yellow WallpaperÓ?
{ZWITTERION} (zwitter-ion) They form spontaneously when amino acids
are in water solutions, since the amine functional group has a higher
pKa than the caboxylic acid group. Also known as an inner salt, the
name for these dipolar species comes from the German for "hybrid."
FTP, give the term for a molecule with separate regions of positive
and negative charge but which is neutral overall. The {LAST JUDGMENT}
On the left, the dead awake and assume flesh; on the right, the damned
are tormented by demons with gargoyle masks and burning eyes. Martyrs
crouch below Christ, who raises hist left hand, and Saint Bartholomew
holds the flaying knife and his skin, in which hangs a self-portrait
of the artist. FTP, identify this fresco on the altar wall of the
Sistine Chapel, one of Michelangelo's later works. John Arbuthnot
{Fisher} Due to the combination of very large, wide-set eyes and a
strangely yellowish skin tone, this Admiral was secretly called "the
son of a Cingalese princess" by his detractors. They had good reason
to fear and distrust him, however, as he shook the foundations of the
Royal Navy often by ignoring old traditionalists in favor of young,
technologically-adept officers like Jellicoe and Beatty. FTP, who was
this man, who served seven years as First Sea Lord, and presided over
the construction of the first Dreadnoughts? {HAMPTON ROADS} Conference
At this conference, Alexander Stephens, R.M.T. Hunter, and J.A.
Campbell represented one side, while William Seward and his boss were
on the other. Held at the urging of Francis P. Blair, it took place on
the steamboat "River Queen." FTP, identify this 1865 peace conference
which took place at the same site as the great battle between the
Monitor and the Merrimack. {NJORD} (nyord) The father of Freyr and
Freyja, he provided food and prosperity. When the goddess Skadi was
told she had to choose her husband by looking only at his feet, she
chose this god, but the marriage was a rocky one, since he couldn't
stand the baying of the wolves and Skadi hated the noise of seagulls,
so each spent the greater part of the year in their own territory.
FTP, who is this Vanir god, exchanged with the Aesir to end their long
struggle, Norse god of the seashore? {CYCLOTRON} The operation of this
instrument is based on the fact that the period of the motion of a
charged particle in a uniform magnetic field is independent of the
velocity of the particle. The particles move in two semicircular metal
containers known as dees, between which is maintained a potential
difference. Each particle is accelerated across this gap by an
electrical field, thereby gaining kinetic energy and moving in
progressively larger orbits. FTP, identify this object, invented by E.
O. Lawrence, important in creating transuranium elements. Yevgeny
Aleksandrovich {YEVTUSHENKO} (do not accept ÒYevshenkoÓ) Born in 1933,
he grew up along the railway line that was the setting for his poem
translated as "Zima Junction." He went on to do a lot of traveling out
of his native Russia, however, and published the account of his
American experience as the play "Under the Skin of the Statue of
Liberty." FTP, identify this writer best known for his "Precocious
Autobiography" and great war poem "Babi Yar." {COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE}
Because of this theory, which the Hecksher-Ohlin model illustrates
with the two factors of capital and labor, nations always can find it
profitable to trade in something. The ricardian model only illustrates
it for the factor of labor, but still shows that if price ratios
differ from country to country, they have a basis for trade. FTP,
identify this theory that says all nations can benefit by trading
goods even if they do not have an absolute advantage in production.
Gottfried Wilhelm von {LEIBNI(T)Z} The son of a professor of moral
philosophy, he taught himself Latin and Greek by age 12 so he could
read his father's books. After receiving a doctorate in law from the
University of Altdorf, he continued his career in the courts of Mainz.
In his philosophical studies, he distinguished three cognitive
faculties: sense, imagination, and reason as well as three modes of
evil: physical, moral, and metaphysical. FTP, name this author of
Monadology, who could have used his law training in settling his
disputes with Newton over the calculus. {Gram} Stain or {Gram}Test
First, flood the heat-fixed smear with crystal violet for one minute.
Next, add iodine solution for 10 minutes. Then briefly decolorize with
alcohol, and finally counterstain with safranin. After this process,
the cells whose cell walls consist chiefly of peptidoglycan will be
purple, while the negative cells appear pinkish-red. FTP, identify
this test used to classify bacteria on the basis of their cell walls.
{VASA} Sigismund III, a product of the Jagello dynasy and this
dynasty, and his sons served as kings of Poland. It originated with
Gustav I, who led a successful uprising against the Danish and
established himself as Lord Protector and then as royalty. FTP,
identify this Swedish dynasty, which ended four generations later with
the abdication of Queen Christina. Edmond-Charles "Citizen" {GENET}
(zhen-ay) Although he would eventually settle down as a famer in
Schenectady, New York, with the daughter of George Clinton, he brought
controversy with him everywhere. He was expelled from Russia in 1792
by Catherine the Great, and was sent over to the United States to
obtain credit or loan repayments from the revolution. FTP, name this
man who stirred up such furor in America trying to drum up support for
France in their war with England that George Wasington tried to have
him sent home. {ARAL} Sea This sea's name comes from words meaning
"Sea of Islands." Formerly the world's fourth largest body of inland
water, after about 1960, because the Amu Darya and Syr Darya Rivers
were diverted for agriculture, its level drastically dropped. FTP,
identify this shrinking sea between Kazakstan and Uzbekistan. Francis
{PARKMAN} His talent for horticulture resulted in The Book of Roses,
but he is better known for writing of a more humanistic bent. After
his graduation from Harvard Law School in 1847, he journeyed from St.
Louis to Fort Laramie and back again, publishing the results in his
first great work of history. FTP, identify the author of The Discovery
of Great West and The Oregon Trail. T. S. {GARP} He is the son of a
reluctant feminist who completed a 1,100-page manuscript of her
autobiography while they both resided in Vienna. A writer with an
unusual affection for prostitutes and babysitters, his last complete
and most controversial work is the result of irreconcilable grief
caused by the death of his son, Walt, in a car crash. FTP, name this
fictional character, the protagonist of a John Irving novel. Frank
{GEHRY} His "deconstructionist" home in Santa Monica features raw-
plywood, corrugated metal and chain-link fence wrapped around the
outside of the house. But despite the temptation of his trademark
curves, there are no mouse ears on his designed-but-as-yet-unbuilt
Walt Disney Concert Hall. FTP, identify the American architect,
currently in the news for the Guggenheim Museum in Bilbao, Spain.
{Nouveau Roman} or {New Novel} This group, who first came to be
collectively named in the 1950's, challenged the conception of the
traditional novel structure, particularly conventions governing plot
and characterization. They strove to create a "new realism" that would
more adequately convey contemporary reality. That goal surfaced in
Alain Robbe-Grillet's assertion of separateness of external reality
from man's projections of himself on reality as well as in Michel
Butor's concentration on the historical and cultural aspects of
humanity's vision of reality. FTP, what is this literary movement,
epitomized in novels like La Jalousie and La Modification? {Origins}
The first edition of this book appeared in 1977 with the chapter
headings "the Greatest Revolution," "Intelligence, Language and the
Human Mind," and finally "Mankind in Perspective." In 1984, one of its
authors "reconsidered" his earlier work, now subtitling it "In Search
of What Makes Us Human." FTP, identify the book, originally co-written
by Roger Lewin and Richard Leakey. Virgil {THOMSON} Leonard Bernstein
said of him, "We all loved his music and rarely performed it." As
music critic for the New York Herald Tribune, his writings contributed
greatly to the acceptance of contemporary classical music. FTP, name
the American composer whose libretti for "The Mother of Us All" and
"Four Saints in three Acts" were written by Gertrude Stein. {Sunna}
The authenticity of its various texts are rated on three levels: the
Sahih, the Hasan, and the Da'if. It includes the books Sahih Bukhari
and the Sunan of Ibn Maajah as well as all recollections of the first
generation of Muslims. FTP, identify this collection of the traditions
of the Prophet Muhammad. James {HUTTON} The theory this man made
famous was published in 1788 in a paper subtitled an "Investigation of
the Laws Observable in the Composition, Dissolution and Restoration of
Land Upon the Globe." In it, he postulated that land was formed by
processes of volcanism, and that biblical stories were not necessary
to explain the origins of the earth. FTP, identify this Scottish
geologist best known for initiating his theory of uniformitarianism
before Lyell. Czeslaw {MILOSZ} For 15: After World War II, he was
appointed a diplomat, but disliked Communism and fled to the United
States. His first major work was The Captive Mind.  For 10: He won the
prize in 1980 and is known for his poetry including the collection
Bells in Winter. He wrote a History of Polish Literature and worked on
a Polish translation of the Bible. {ECCLESIASTES} 30-20-10: Identify
the book of the Bible from verses.  30: Remember your Creator in the
days of your youth, before the days of trouble come.  20:
"Meaningless! Meaningless!" says the Teacher. "Everything is
meaningless!"  10: There is a time for everything, and a season for
every activity under heaven: a time to be born and a time to die. the
Battle of {NAVARINO} This battle, fought in the ancient Pylos between
British, French and Russian naval forces on one side and the Egyptian
fleet on the other, effectively saved Greece at its most critical
moment because the destruction of the Egyptian fleet meant that the
Turkish forces could not touch the island strongholds of the Greek
cause. Naguib{Mahfouz} In 1994 this Nobel Prize winning author was
stabbed in the neck outside his house and the injury now hampers his
ability to write. Ironically, the period when he was most in danger of
being attacked was more than 30 years earlier when in 1959 the
serialized publication of "Children of Gebelawi" caused an uproar akin
to that over Rushdie's "Satanic Verses", in his staunchly Islamic
homeland. He won the 1988 Nobel Prize for "form(ing) an Arabic
narrative art that applies to all mankind." FTP name this author,
responsible for writing the Cairo Trilogy. {Brahmaputra} The Kaziranga
national park can be found along this river which drains an area of
around 361,000 sq. miles. Its ancient Greek name was Dyardanes or
Oedanes. Arising in a Himalayan glacier, it is known as the Tsangpo in
Tibet. As it nears its delta, this river takes on the name of the
Jamuna. In the Northeastern states of India, its name changes to the
Dihang. FTP name this South Asian river which joins the Ganges before
emptying into the Bay of Bengal, and whose official name is derived
from the Sanskrit for the creator in the Hindu trinity. George Edward
{Pickett} After graduating last in his class in 1846 from the West
Point, N.Y, he served with distinction in the Mexican War. After
entering the Confederate Army, he was involved at the Battle of
Fredericksburg, and was divisional commander under Lee throughout the
1864 Virginia Campaign. After the war he worked in insurance. FTP,
name this man best known for his actions on the third day of
Gettysburg, in which he led the greatest infantry charge in American
history -- 15,000 troops in a frontal assault -- against Union forces
on Cemetary Ridge. {Merovingian} dynasty Towards the end of this
dynasty's reign, its kings were called "les rois faineants" (FAY-NAY-
ON), or the tired kings, because they did essentially nothing while
their power passed into other hands. It ruled from AD 481 to 751, and
at its height its territory included all of present day France and
Germany. After the reign of Dagobert I, authority became decentralized
and gradually passed into the hands of noble families, most notable of
which were the Carolingians. FTP name this dynasty, whose first king
was Clovis, and which was named after Merovech, the chief of the
Salian Franks. Count {Rumford} or Benjamin {Thompson} His numerous
innovations include thermal underwear, a drip coffee-pot, the
smokeless chimney, the kitchen oven, and central heating. This
American scientist and innovator from Woburn, Massachusetts, also has
a brand of baking powder named after him. FTP, name this man, who was
suspected of spying for the British during the Revolutionary war, fled
America, and is today best remembered for disproving the caloric
theory of heat when he observed that heat was generated due to
friction while drilling cannons, and, furthermore, making the
association of heat with motion. {Categorical Imperative} This term
expresses the moral law as ultimately enacted by reason and demanding
obedience from mere respect for reason. Therefore the first
fundamental principle of morality is: "Let the law be the sole ground
or motive of thy will." The law is capable of inspiring respect by
reason of its universality and necessity, and hence the general
formula of the moral law becomes: "Act so that the maxim [determining
motive of the will] may be capable of becoming a universal law for all
rational beings." FTP, name this theory expounded by Immanuel Kant in
the Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals. {Manichaeism} Although
it disappeared in the West by the 6th century, this religion's
doctrines reappeared in the teachings of the Albigenses and other
heretical sects during the middle ages. It taught that salvation could
be gained by liberating the seed of light, the soul from the material
darkness of the body. Its prophet considered his task to be completing
the incomplete religions left by the earlier prophets, Zoroaster,
Christ, and the Buddha. Christianity always regarded this religion as
a mere heretical sect, with Justinian issuing an edict against it. FTP
name this religion which was founded in Babylonia in the 3rd century
A.D. by a Persian called Mani. {Six Degrees of Separation} Flanders
and Ouisa Kitteredge are art dealers, who are having a South African
friend over for dinner, when Paul bursts in with a stab wound,
explaining that he's their son's friend. The scene shifts to Harvard,
MIT and Dartmouth looking for Paul's suddence emergence and his true
identity. There are numerous references to art, especially a double-
sided Kandinsky which rotates to show the duality of man's nature.
FTP, name this play by John Guare, loosely based on a true story, in
which a young man tries to enter society. {Mozart's Requiem} It was
commissioned in the summer of 1791 by Count Franz Walsegg- Stuppach,
who wanted it to remember his wife by. He first conducted it, and it
was known as his piece for almost thirty years. The composer died
shorty after undertaking the task, so Franz Sussmayr, an earlier
pupil, had to complete most of the work. Written in the solemn key of
Dminor, some of the more famous components are Dies irae, Confutatus
and Lacrimosa. FTP, name the composer and the famous work. {Eddas}
Their name could be derived from the Old Norse for great grandmother.
They tell the story of the creation of the world as the cow Audhumbla
licked salt off an ice mass to create the progenitor of Odin and the
other Norse gods. One of these books was written around 1056 by
Saemund Sigfusson, the other in the 1200's by Snorri Sturluson. FTP
what is the collective name used for these two Icelandic volumes which
form the most authoritive source of old Norse mythology? William
Somerset {Maugham} P.G. Wodehouse said that this playwright "succeeded
in shocking Broadway so that the sidewalks were filled with blushing
ticket-speculators," and at one point only Shaw had more plays running
at the same time in London. He is best remembered, however, for his
novels. His favorite locales include rural and urban England,
Singapore, Malaysia, the Hawaiian and other Pacific islands, as well
as Spain, France, and the United States. Name this writer whose novels
include The Painted Veil, The Moon and Six Pence, Cakes and Ale, and
Of Human Bondage. {Jay's Treaty} Henry Adams insinuated that "not one
would dare to defend it on its merits now." Supported by the
Federalists and derided by the Republicans, this treaty became
extremely unpopular and the man for whom it was named was burned in
effigy. It's provisions included a definite date for British troop
withdrawal, to compensate for its depredations against American
shipping; to end discrimination against American commerce; and to
grant the U.S. trading privileges in England and the British East
Indies.FTP, what is this 1794 Treaty, signed by Lord Grenville and
named for the a negotiator at the Treaty of Paris and the first
Supreme Court Justice. Jacques {Charles} The first person to ascend in
a hydrogen balloon, he was concerned as to how the temperature of the
gas filling the balloon would affect its size and shape. Ballooning
was only a hobby, however, for this clerk in the French Ministry of
Finance and inventor of the hydrometer and the reflecting goniometer.
Strangely enough, he was elected to the Academie des Sciences in 1795
not for his work in physics or chemistry, but for his little known
mathematical theses on number theory. FTP name this French physicist
most famous for the chemical law bearing his name, which states that
the volume of an ideal gas is directly proportional to its temperature
in Kelvin. Francis {Marion} This delegate to the South Carolina
Provincial Congress was commissioned a captain in the state militia in
1775, based on his service record in the Cherokee Wars. After escaping
the British after the surrender of Charleston, he formed his band of
local guerillas, and began a series of routs of the British regulars,
culminating in the daring rescue of encircled patriots at Parker's
Ferry. His unit was able to succeed by using their knowledge of
backwoods and wetlands to prepare ambushes and evade pursuers. FTP,
name this soldier, nicknamed the Swamp Fox for his use of elusive
tactics. {Gothic} The major text surviving in this language is a
fragmented translation of the Bible by Bishop Ulfilas. He also devised
the alphabet for this language, its 27 characters consisting of 25
modified Greek symbols, and 2 runes. It is the only East Germanic
language for which we have any written evidence, and between the 7th
and 9th centuries was replaced in parts of Germany and Italt by
Romance and other Germanic languages. FTP name this language, once
spoken by the Ostrogoths of Germany and Italy, and the Visigoths of
Eastern Europe, whose name can also be applied to the novel
Frankenstein. {Mr. W.H.} Oscar Wilde posited in a short story that he
was the boy actor for whom Shakespeare wrote his greatest roles. Based
on internal evidence in the sonnets Wilde came up with Willie Hughes
as a possible name for him, although it is more commonly held that if
indeed he existed he was of far nobler origins. Possible candidates
are the Earl of Southampton, and the Earl of Pembroke, although some
maintain that Shakespeare himself is the man who is alluded to in the
dedication of the sonnets. FTP, name this person, "the onlie begetter"
of Shakepseare's sonnets, who is identified only by his initials. The
{Devil and Daniel Webster} Creedence Clearwater Revival based their
song "Bad Mood Rising" upon the movie based on this story. The main
character is but a poor farmer whose crops won't grow, and who is
beset on all sides by misfortune. In a fit of rage he swears that
he'll give it up to the devil, who promptly shows up and makes him
sign a contract, the former a Newhampshireman who won't take back what
he's said. He rises to town selectment and state representative before
the devil decides to claim his property. Not knowing what to do, he
travels down to Marshfield to visit the Secretary of State, who is
busy writing speeches against John C. Calhoun and tending the farm.
The former Senator argues in front of an American jury to defend Jabez
Stone's soul and wins in, FTP, what Steven Benet classic? {Taxol} This
substance stops cell mitosis by catalyzing the polymerization reaction
between alpha and beta tubulin and inhibiting the reverse reaction,
thus not allowing the formation of a cell plate and kinetochore
microtubules. Therapy with this drug has given hope of full recovery
to those with ovarian and testicular cancer, two types that were
previously almost untreatable. In 1995 two independent groups of
researchers completed total laboratory synthesis of themolecules,
quieting the concerns of environmentalists about deforestation of old
growth forests. FAQTP, name this powerful anti-cancer drug, first
derived from the bark and needles of the Pacific Yew, Taxus
brevifolia. {Lutetium} This element occurs in various rare earth
minerals, usually associated with yttrium. It is the rarest of the
rare earths, and ranks 59th in the order of abundance of the elements
in the earth's crust. A radioactive isotope with a half life of 30
billion years is used to determine the age of meteorites in relation
to the earth's age. FTP, name this silvery white metal with atomic
number 71, which was discovered in 1907 by the chemist Georges Urbain,
and was named for the ancient name of Paris. {Elephant} One of these
mammals, named Airavat, was the Hindu god Indra's mount. They have
been domesticated since 2000 BC, and have also been used in war.
Alexander's armies faced them when fighting in India. The modern
equestrian sport of tent pegging probably comes from the practise of
striking their toe nails while riding by; the excruciating pain that
results is one of the only ways of felling these battle tanks of yore.
FTP name this animal, which belongs to the order proboscidea, and
whose two speices are Loxodonta africana and Elephas maximus. {The
Mouse that Roared} The tiny Duchy of Grand Fenwick is facing economic
ruin, so Prime Minister Count Mountjoy sends a party led by the
incompetent Tully Bascombe to invade the US, expecting the
unsuccessful invasion to bring US postwar aid. But Tully lands in New
York, finds no opposition, and comes home with the newly developed,
lethal Q-bomb and its developer Dr. Kokintz. This leads to a shift in
the balance of world power in FTP what 1959 film starring Peter
Sellers in three roles? {Philadelphia} One ancient city bearing this
name was situated in Lydia and was founded in the 2nd century BC. The
site of the ancient city is occupied by the modern city Alasehir,
Turkey. Another city with the same name was originally the ancient
Rabbath Ammon, the capital of the Ammonites, in Palestine. The site is
near modern Amman. FTP give the shared name which was bestowed on the
second of these cities when it was rebuilt by the Egyptian king
Ptolemy Philadelphus. {Algeria} Last August 300 villagers were
massacred in Rais, and just as Ramadan was beginning this last
December an attack left 412 dead. It is a civil war that is
responsible for killing upwards of 75,000 people in the last 6 years.
Most of slaughter has been confined to the Miditja plain, an area
below the Atlas mountains in FTP what North African country where the
Armed Islamic Group is trying to bring down the military backed
government? {Isoquants} The axes can represent different factors of
production, and the curves represent the tradeoff between them. These
economic curves are similar to indifference curves, but are drawn in
production space rather than consumption space. Unlike indifference
curves which are not associated with any specific amount of utility,
each of these curves represents a certain level of output for the
firm. FTP, what are these curves, thus named because they link points
of equal quanitity of production, much like isobars connect points of
equal pressure. {Bathers}at Asnieres After Georges Seurat submitted
this painting to the Salon, in 1884, it was rejected at first, and
when shown later in the year, it was relegated to the refreshment
hall. It was the first major painting that captured the scenery of the
Seine river, in Paris' north-western suburb of Asnieres, a location
where artists like Van Gogh and Signac would later paint famous
canvases. Seurat himself painted A Sunday on the Island of La Grand
Jatte from a site just across the river from where he painted this
painting, which now resides at the National Gallery in London. FTP
name this large canvas which depicts a group of men and boys relaxing
and bathing on the banks of the Seine near Asnieres. {Magister Ludi}
or Joseph {Knecht} Among his literary works are three "lives" or
fictional autobiographies. His talent at music, however, is what
allowed him to enter the Castilian Province, where he spent most of
his life. One significant interlude consisted of the several years he
spent at a Benedictine monastery, where he was befriended by Father
Jacobus, who introduced him to the study of history. He ultimately
left Castilia and became tutor to Tito, son of his old friend, Plinio
Designori, dying soon after in a swimming race. Because of his
elevated position, however, the repercussions of his defection were
felt throughout Castilia, and the fusion between the sterile literacy
of this province and the vibrancy of the outside world may eventually
have occurred. Name this man, or the title he held for many years as
the master of the Glass Bead Game. Madame or Marquise {de Sevigne}
LaRochefocauld was a close friend of hers, as was Fouquet, to whom she
was faithful to the very end. Her birth would have assured her a place
close to the Louis XIV, but her position was somewhat compromised by
her cousin Rabutin, who was imprisoned in the Bastille, and later
exiled. However, at one point the King himself courted her daughter
Francoise, who eventually married the Marquis de Grignan. Name this
woman, born Marie Rabutin, who was left a young widow at the death of
her husband in a duel, and is best known for her epistolary accounts
of life in the 15th century, descibing royal interviews, fashionable
society, country landscapes, and the suicide of a cook because of his
wounded pride. {Giardia} intestinalis (also accept {Giardia} lamblia)
Often called the missing link between prokaryotes and eukaryotes, this
unicellular protist has only two distinct organelles, both of which
are nuclei. This organism has no mitochondria, and cannot produce the
enzyme oxygenase that allows all other eukaryotes to live in aerobic
environments, and thus must undergo metabolism solely through
glycolysis, making t the only eukaryote unable to produce ATP by
oxidative phosphorolation. FTP, name this common intestinal parasite,
whose DNA sequence contains genes that code for more prokaryotic than
eucaryotic proteins. Honore de {Balzac} Born in 1799, this man's life
was dominated by his mother who outlived him. In 1821 he met Laure de
Berny his longtime mistress who was 22 years his senior. Moving from
Tours to a Paris garret in 1814, he embarked on the regimen he was to
follow for the rest of his life: 16 hours workdays, and the
consumption of immense amounts of coffee. Auguste{Rodin} The son of a
Paris policeman, he enrolled in the Ecole Imperiale Speciale de Dessin
et de Mathematiques and was initially an apperentice in the studios of
major sculptors of the day. During a trip to Italy in 1875-76 he
studied the masters and shortly thereafter produced his first
masterwork, the Vanquished. Isaac {Asimov} 30-20-10-5 Name the author
from works.  30: The Sensuous, Dirty Old Man, Lecherous Limericks,
annotated versions of Don Juan and Gulliver's Travels  20: Purr-fect
Crime, Thirteen Horrors of Holloween, The Casebook of the Black
Widowers  10: The Caves of Steel, The Naked Sun, Azazel  5:
Foundation, Foundation and Empire, Second Foundation {Prophase} For
10: During this mitotic phase, the nucleus and cytoplasm undergo
changes. In the nucleus, the nucleoli disappear and the chromatin
begin to be formed into distinguishable double chromosomes called
sister chromatids. In the cytoplasm the spindle fibers are formed and
the centrosomes spread apart. {Gypsum} 30-20-10 Identify the mineral
30: This mineral, chemically named Calcium Sulfate dihydride,
naturally occurs in extensive beds associated with other evaporite
minerals like anhydrite and halite, particularly in Permian and
Triassic sedimentary formations, as a result of the evaporation of
ocean brine.  20: The fine-grained massive variety is called
alabaster, while in well- developed crystals the mineral commonly has
been called selenite. It is an important constituent of cap rock an
anhydrite forming a covering on salt domes; it also occurs
disseminated in limestones, dolomitic limestones, and some shales.
10: This mineral is of reat commercial importance. Crude forms are
used as a fluxing agent, fertilizer, filler in paper and textiles, and
retarder in portland cement. About three-fourths of the total
production is calcined for use as plaster of paris and as building
materials in plaster, Keene's cement, board products, and tiles and
blocks. The Gypsite is the earthy pulverulent variety. {Harpies} For
10: The argonauts came across these creatures starving an old man by
fouling his food before he could eat it. On Iris' behest they drove
them away instead of killing them. One makes a fleeting appearance in
Shakespeare's Tempest.  For 5: They had the heads of old women, and
the bodies and wings of birds. Their name comes from a Greek verb
meaning "to snatch." {Griffin} For 10: This creature seems to have
originated in the Middle East, with the Babylonians and Assyrians
using them in sculptures. In christian times this creature was a motif
in bestiaries of St. Basil and St. Ambrose.  5: This creature had the
head, and wings of an eagle, the body of a lion, and a serpent's tail.
One appears in Carroll's Alice in Wonderland. Sir Francis{Galton}
30-20-10, name the anthropologist:  30: He was educated at Trinity
College Cambridge, his study of meteorology led him to write
Meteorographica, the first book on modern weather mapping techniques.
He is considered to be the founder of Eugenics  20: A cousin of
Darwin, he became interested in heredity, and collected anatomical
statistics on a large number of people. He was the first to
demonstrate the calculation of statistical correlation.  10: His
collection of statistics on the human body led him to devise a method
of identification by fingerprinting. {Turing Machine}(inv. by Alan
Mathison Turing) Had this machine been built, it would have had
roughly the power of a modern desktop computer. Its design was was
important in the development of modern computing and the structure of
imperative programming languages such as C and BASIC. Its "inventor"
died of self adminstered poisoning at the age of 41. {Corn laws} In
English history, these were any of the regulations governing the
import and export of grain. They achieved significance in the late
18th century during the grain shortage caused by Britain's growing
population and blockades imposed in the Napoleonic Wars. They were
repealed in 1846, a triump for manufacturing interests.
Konrad{Adenauer} The son of a Cologne court clerk, he was the mayor of
that city until 1933 when he was expelled by the Nazis.  5: in 1945 he
was reinstated as mayor, and became the cofounder of the Christian
Democratic Union. He retired from chancellorship in 1963, but remained
in the parliament for 4 more years. {Oscar and Lucinda} For 10: In
mid-1800's England, a young man Oscar is an Anglican priest, a misfit
and an outcast, but with the soul of an angel. A young woman is an
heiress who wants to liberate her sex from the confines of male-
dominated culture. They meet on a ship going to Australia; once there,
they are for different reasons ostracized from society, and as a
result "join forces" together.  5: Peter Carey {Emile} An influential,
fictional treatise on education, which was condemned, causing
Rousseau's subsequent exile from France. Rousseau explains that humans
are naturally good and independent, with society corrupting the state
of nature by creating the laws of property and unnatural desires.
People must be educated to bring out their natural goodness.
{D'Alembert's Dream} Diderot speaks with a famous contemporary
mathematician about life; this mathematician has a dream that is
interpreted by a doctor and a friend. But the content dares to strike
unorthodox perceptions in many fields of study. What eventually is
formed is a picture of man as a mechanical instrument, and
dissassembles morality and man-made institutions as falsity built on
misperceptions. Heinrich {BOLL} (or BOELL; the o has an umlaut) His
1997 book "The Mad Dog" contains ten of his earliest stories. His
"Irish Journal" details his 1950's trip from his native Germany to the
Emerald Isle. A table with a cigarette burn keeps popping up
throughout his story "And Where Were You, Adam?" For 10 points,
identify this 1972 Nobel laureate whose works also include "The Safety
Net" and "The Lost Honor of Katharina Blum." Adam {Smith} An anecdote
about this notoriously absentminded man says he once prepared himself
a beverage of bread and butter and called it the worst cup of tea he
had ever tasted. At the age of four, he was kidnapped by gypsies but
later recovered, and he was nearly expelled from Oxford for having a
copy of David Hume's A Treatise of Human Nature. He became a Dean at
the University of Glasgow in 1758, and later traveled to France, where
he befriended Francois Quesnay. FTP, who is this man, whose greatest
work became the foundation for the field of economics? Martin
{HEIDEGGER} "The Philosophical Lexicon" playfully defines his last
name as "a ponderous device for boring through thick layers of
substance." His lover and former student Hannah Arendt died in 1975,
the year before he did. For 10 points, identify this temporary rector
of Freiburg University under the Nazis and author of "Being and Time."
{"PUNCH"} Its staff writers included John Leach, Dicky Doyle, and a
young William Makepeace Thackeray. It once suggested that poor people
be labeled with the letter P and gave London's Great Exhibition Hall
the nickname of "Crystal Palace." For 10 points, name this humor
magazine of early Victorian England. Arnold {Schoenberg} This man had
a cousin and a brother who were singers, and his cousin was the first
to sing the role of Waldemar in one of his compositions. His early
composing life was held up for a short time when he had to wait for
the "S" encyclopedia to learn how to compose the sonata form movement
for a string quartet. Later in his career, he commented that "There is
still much good music to be written in C major," although he had
discovered something "which will assure the supremacy of German music
for the next 100 years," the 12-tone method. FTP, who is this composer
of Gurrelieder, The Hand of Fate, Transfigured Night, and Pierrot
Lunaire? {Cuchulain} Tricked into an unfair fight and killed at the
age of 27, this warrior nevertheless had a great career. Born Setante,
son of the god Lug, he had seven fingers on each hand, seven toes on
each foot, and seven pupils in each eye. When he was only 17, he
defended Ulster against the invasion of Queen Maeve. FTP, who is this
leader of the Red Branch, hero of the Ulster Cycle? Aimee Semple
{McPherson} A man, a lion, and ox, and an eagle appeared to this woman
in the 1920's, and this vision led her to develop a gospel based on
the themes of salvation, Holy Spirit baptism, healing, and the Second
Coming of Christ. The Angelus Temple in Los Angeles became the center
of her religion, and it grew quickly for the next few years. Her son,
Rolf, assumed leadership of the church after her. FTP, who is this
woman, founder of the Foursquare Gospel? {Pentecost} The name's the
same. The Christians celebrate it with a feast on the 7th Sunday
following Easter, in order to commemorate the descent of the Holy
Spirit upon the Apostles fifty days after the resurrection of Christ.
The Jewish celebrate it fifty days after Passover to commemorate the
offering of barley. FTP give the shared name derived from Greek
meaning fiftieth. {Hyper-Inflation} (Prompt on inflation) Excepting
the Civil War, The Federal Reserve Board has prevented this condition
from ever occurring in America. Since they cannot treat the economy
with Ritalin, they affect changes through the interest rate, to keep
the value of the dollar relatively steady, and avoid the price
increases of more than 50% per month experienced in certian parts of
the world. FTP name this condition, most vividly illustrated by the
devaluation of Confederate currancy during the Civil War. {Pascal} If
any six points on a conic section are joined by straight lines, and if
the sides of the hexagon thus formed are extended, the three pairs of
opposite sides will intersect at three points that lie on one straight
line. FTP name this theorom, originally contained in the "Treatise on
Conic Sections", and which shares its name with a wager and law of
fluid dynamics. Frederick {Remington} He studied at the Yale School of
Fine Arts. He wrote 13 books and illustrated 142 more. In all, he
produced about 2,800 paintings and sketches, plus hundreds of magazine
illustrations. All of his work centered around themes of the Old West:
Cowboys, horses, and Indians. FTP name this American artist cheifly
known for his 25 bronze sculptures, including ÒBronco BusterÓ, and for
Òfurnishing the picturesÓ for William Randolph HearstÕs Òwar.Ó
{"MURDER ON THE ORIENT EXPRESS"} A dropped handkerchief with the
monogrammed letter H helps identify the killer in this novel. But
suspicion moves to an unlikely source when the H is found to be a
letter in the Cyrillic alphabet. This plot twist can be found -- for
10 points -- in what famous Agatha Christie whodunit that takes place
on a train? {PITUITARY} In 1894, extracts from it were found to affect
human blood pressure, but even 15 years later, it was still described
as "a small bi-lobed body of unknown function attached to the
infundibulum (in-fun-DIB-ya-lum) at the base of the brain." For 10
points, name this gland that regulates the body's thyroid and adrenal
glands and whose anterior produces human growth hormone. The
{ZIMMERMANN} Telegram It says, in part, "We intend to begin
unrestricted submarine warfare [and] shall endeavor to keep the United
States neutralÓ We make Mexico a proposal of alliance [with] an
understanding¼ that Mexico is to reconquer the lost territory in
Texas, New Mexico and Arizona¼" For 10 points, identify this World War
I telegram whose name comes from the German who signed it. Julia
{CHILD} She was a file manager in China when she met her husband Paul,
speaking to him in a voice once described as "two parts Broderick
Crawford to one part Elizabeth II". For 10 points, name this American
who later attended the Cordon Bleu school and collaborated with two of
her friends on a massive French cookbook. "{Things Fall Apart}" It's
title is taken from W.B. Yeats' "The Second Coming," and it chronicles
the downfall of a village leader named Okonkwo ; when he returns from
exile, he finds colonial laws and Christianity where tribal laws once
held sway. He attempts to lead a revolt but has no support and hangs
himself in disgrace. FTP name this 1958 work, perhaps the best known
modern African novel, by Chinua Achebe. Paul A.M. {Dirac} His father
wanted him to learn French and refused to speak to him if addressed in
English. His use of approximations while studying engineering
encouraged him to think intuitively about expressing fundamental laws
of nature. He applied special relativity to quantum mechanics,
developed transformation theory, and predicted the existence of
positrons. FTP identify this theoretical physicist, co-winner of the
1933 Nobel Prize  along with Erwin Schroedinger. {Zeno} of Elea
Plato's tale of him meeting with Socrates are probably inaccurate.
Aristotle credited him with invention of the dialectic. He's best
known as being the pupil of Parmenides and a disciple of radical
monism, and for the paradoxes of Achilles and the Tortoise and the
arrow that cannot move once it is shot. FTP identify this Eleatic
school pre-Socratic philosopher. {Titan} Its atmosphere is mostly
nitrogen. Covered by a red haze, the average surface temperatures is
just under 100 Kelvin, and it's interior is likely a strange
combination of rock, ice, and frozen methane. It's one of the best
prospects for finding life in the solar system due to the presence of
methane, ammonia, and frozen water. FTP name this satellite,
discovered by Christian Huygens in 1655, second largest in the solar
system to Jupiter's Ganymede, which orbits Saturn. {Judas Iscariot}
"...Falling headlong he burst open in the middle and all his bowels
gushed out." Even more gruesome descriptions of his suicide are found
in Coptic works, and in medieval literature. His surname is a
corruption of the Latin word for "assassin," suggesting he was a
member of a radical Jewish faction. He acted as treasurer of the
apostles, and is always listed last. FTP identify this apostle, who
for 30 pieces of silver, betrayed Jesus. {kidney}s The granular cortex
contains glomeruli and convoluted tubules, and can secrete renin, an
enzyme that acts as a powerful vasoconstrictor ; the more striated
medulla contain collecting tubules and the loop of Henle. Blood comes
to it via the renal arteries, and waste leaves through the renal
pelvis into ureters. FTP, identify this organ, repsonible for
filtering nitrogenous wastes from the bloodstream. Jay {Gatsby}
(accept "The Great Gatsby") Born in 1890, he sailed the seas for five
years when his mentor Dan Cody gave him. After seeing action in World
War I, he allegedly engaged in shady dealings with Meyer Wolfsheim. He
died at the age of 32, killed by a man who thought that he had killed
his wife Myrtle. FTP identify this fictional socialite, whose story is
told by his friend Nick Caraway, the subject of a 1925 novel by F.
Scott Fitzgerald. Werner von {Braun} Upon his confirmation in the
Lutheran Church, his mother gave him a telescope, and his interest in
space never waned. After receiving his Ph.D. in physics from Berlin
University in 1932, he continued his research for the military, first
in Germany and then in the United States. For 10 points, name this
engineer who helped design the Saturn launch vehicle, Explorer I, and
the V-2 rocket. {Lochner} v. New York It's never been overruled, but
Justice Peckham's majority opinion is never cited these days, since
the reasoning of such cases as _Parrish v. West Coast Hotel_ have
largely overtaken it. More famous is the dissent of Justice Holmes.
FTP identify this case that recognized economic substantive due
process, a 1905 case about laws concerning overtime hours in bakeries.
{Formaldehyde} or {methanal} Derived from the vapor-phase oxidation of
methanol, it yields methenamine when mixed with ammonia. It reacts in
speical ways with proteins, causing it to be used as a soil sterilant
and disinfectant. FTP identify this chemical, formula HCHO, best known
for its use as an embalming agent, the simplest of the aldehydes.
Marshall {McLuhan} In his first full-length work, "The Mechanical
Bride," he attempted to explain the purposes and effects of
advertising in culture. He offered the thesis of historical change
based on communications technology, particularly the invention of the
printing press, in "The Gutenberg Galaxy." FTP, identify this cultural
critic, best known for the work "Understanding Media," and his most
famous phrase "the medium is the message." {Balder} Eulogized by Henry
Longfellow, Matthew Arnold, and William Morris, he's often seen as a
sign of Chrisitan influence. One legend his him killed in a lovers'
quarrel by the sword of Miming, but the better known one has this
denizen of Breidhablik in Asgard slain by an arrow armed with
mistletoe. FTP identify this Norse deity, the god of light, purity,
and "the good." {"Apocalypse Now"} Filming in the Philippines was
supposed to take six weeks but instead lasted sixteen months. Harvey
Keitel was replaced in the lead by Martin Sheen, who had a heart
attack in mid-production. Director Francis Ford Coppola invested
millions of his own money in this film when it went badly overbudget,
and argued with Marlon Brando over lines for weeks. Despite these
inauspicious omens, the film was a great success, garnering several
Oscar nominations. FTP identify this epic 1979 film about the Vietnam
War, based loosely on Conrad's "Heart of Darkness." "{Infinite Jest}"
Its title refers to the name of an unreleased film that causes death
to anyone who views it, which in turn comes from Hamlet's eulogy for
Yorick. Taking place in a near, post-quasi-apocolyptic future, its
settings include a halfway house and a tennis camp, but this work is
perhaps most notorious for its length, 1,098 pages. FTP, identify this
1993 novel by David Foster Wallace. {T'ang} Dynasty An elaborate
system of canals was finally completed. A period of vast territorial
expansion, and an era of Confucian dominance, perhaps the most famous
figures from this period were not emperors but the poets Po Chui, Tu
Fu, and Li Po. FTP identify this Chinese dynasty, which ruled China
from 618 to 907 AD/CE. Battle of {Marathon} Darius, enraged at Eretria
and Athens, sent Hippias, the exiled son of Pisistratus, to lead
30,000 Persians. Outnumbered three to one, mostly Athenian forces
under Miltiades, fighting in close array, defeated the Persian
calvary. FTP identify this epic 490 BCE battle, news of which was,
according to legend, brought to Athens by Pheidippides. Odalisque
Derived from the Turkish word for a Harem girl, this term for the
reclining, recumbent female nude is a recurrent theme throughout
Western art. The term was first used by Dominique Ingres, in a
painting of the same title. Attracted to exotic, erotic subjects, this
normally staid Neoclassicist created a new genre for others to follow
such as Giorgione in "Sleeping Venus", Goya in "Nude Maja" and Manet
in "Olympia." FTP give this art term applicable to any relaxed,
comfortable woman painted without clothing. Lilith The title character
of an imaginative novel by George MacDonald, in Talmudic religion,
this demon was said to haunt wildernesses in stormy weather and be
especially dangerous to children and pregnant women. In Arabic
mythology she married the Devil and became the mother of evil spirits.
Hebrew legend holds that she was created simultaneously with Adam and
was his first wife, but, refusing to be considered his inferior, she
left him and was expelled from Eden to a region of the air. FTP, name
this woman, referred to as "the screech owl" in the King James
Version. Conan Born into a clan that claimed a homeland in the
northwest corner of the world, along the shadowy borders of Vanaheim
and the Pictish wilderness. Records of his birth and his parents are
scarce. But it's known that his father was a blacksmith and fled from
his own people because of a blood feud and sought refuge with the
people of the North. He first saw daylight on a battlefield during a
raid by the Vanir and went from there went to kill, steal, and wench
his way around the world. FTP, name this Cimmerian Savage created by
Robert E. Howard. {1948} 30-20-10 Name the year from clues.  30 :
Kinsey Report on Human Sexuality published ; World Health Organization
founded.  20 : The transistor was invented ; the Orgzanization of
American States is founded.  10 : Mahatma Gandhi assassinated ; Strom
Thurmond wins electoral votes as a presidential candidate. {TWIN}
Paradox It is perhaps inappropriately named, because there are a great
many solutions to the problem posed, and there is now very little
controversy over the answer. Many solutions make use of the
relativistic Doppler shift, but perhaps the simplest explanation is
that one of the observers feels an acceleration and the other does
not, and this acceleration breaks the symmetry in the problem. For ten
points name this apparent paradox arising from Einstein's theory of
special relativity, so named because each of two siblings apparently
should age less than the other. Zoltan {KODALY} (koh-die-ee) When
Vladimir Horowitz married Wally, the daughter of Arturo Toscanini,
this composer wrote a set of four Italian madrigals to celebrate their
wedding. Aside from his orchestral works and operas such as "Szekely
fono", he collaborated with Bela Bartok on a collection of folksongs.
FTP, name this composer of such works as the Marosszek Dances and Hary
Janos. {GRANICUS} This battle would have never been fought if the
Persians had heeded the advice of Memnon of Rhodes, who advocated a
scorched-earth policy which would force the Macedonians to withdraw
for lack of supplies. This insulted the Persian dignity, and they
opted to stand and fight, selecting a strong defensive position behind
a river. However, it didn't matter, as the phalanx proved victorious
anyway. For ten points, name this 334 BC battle, Alexander the Great's
first victory in Asia Minor. {PHILOSOPHER KINGS} Their initial
education is in elementary mathematics, music, and poetry, accompanied
by physical training. After this comes two or three years of military
service, followed by ten years of learning mathematical science. The
best of these then learn five years of training in dialectic, and then
finally the best of these receive a full fifteen years of practical
political training. This describes the education of, for ten points,
what ideal ruler described in Plato's _Republic_? {CALAMITY JANE} or
Martha Jane {CANARY} or Martha {JANE BURKE} Some said her nickname
came from her help to victims of misfortune, and others from her own
hard-luck experiences. Many believe, however, that this supposed
romantic interest of Wild Bill Hickok and actual wife of Clinton Burke
got her nickname from warnings that offending her was to court the
event that usually precedes her Christian name. FTP, identify this
expert rifle- and horsewoman who traveled with Wild West shows in the
1890s. the Internet {WORM} The date on which it struck was nicknamed
"Black Thursday," and had it occurred ten years later, it probably
could have affected the stock market. Fortunately, though, this
particular disaster happened in 1988, well before its target had
reached its present size. It worked by repeatedly spawning processes
on the victimized machine, causing its performance to slow to a crawl,
and consisted of a two parts: a 99-line bootstrap C program which was
transmitted first to the target computer, which then pulled over the
rest of the program from the original computer. For ten points, what
was this non- virus which attacked the Internet on November 3, 1988?
the {J} / {PSI} meson (both required) The first meson to be discovered
containing the charm quark, it was discovered almost simultaneously by
teams at the Stanford Linear Accelerator and Brookhaven National
Laboratories, led by Burton Richter and Samuel Ting, both of whom
received the Nobel Prize in 1976 for the discovery. For ten points,
give both names for this meson, one name the English letter often used
to denote current density, and the other the Greek letter often used
for the wave function. {MEDEA} She persuaded the daughers of Pelias
that she could rejuvenate him if they cut him to pieces, and when
Pelias was dead, her allies put Acastus on the throne. She murdered
her half brother Apsyrtus, and later her two sons by her first
husband, when he left her to marry Glauce, after which she married
Aegeus. When she tried to poison Theseus, she was banished from Athens
and returned to Colchis, whose king Aeetes was her father. For ten
points, identify this niece of Circe and priestess of Hecate who
helped her first husband Jason steal the Golden Fleece. {INCHON}
invasion It had to be launched at high tide to be successful, which
meant that only twenty-three days were available for practice. It was
so successful, though, that a mere thirteen days after it began, it
had achieved its objective. Devised by MacArthur as a plan to break
out of the Pusan perimeter, it was a brilliant success, as the
invasion behind enemy lines allowed the South Korean forces to advance
nearly the length of Korea in less than a month. For ten points, what
was this invasion which commenced on September 15, 1950? {DON JUAN}
(prompt on "Don Giovanni") George Bernard Shaw, Gustave Flaubert, They
Might Be Giants, Thomas Shadwell, Prosper Merimee, Balzac, and Moliere
were among those who wrote versions of the story. Alexander Pushkin's
short verse drama "The Stone Guest" closely followed his story as
well. The first literary account was in Tirso de Molina's "El Burlador
de Sevilla," but none of these accounts are as famous as Byron's epic
satire or the great Mozart opera. For ten points name the common
protagonist, the famous libertine of Seville. {MANZIKERT} The losing
army was defeated primarily by desertions, as many of the Turkmen
horsemen deserted at the beginning of the battle, and as the commander
ordered a retreat at the end, the reserve, led by Andronicus Ducas, a
bitter rival of the army's commander, deserted, leaving the rest of
the army to be decisively crushed. As a result, Romanus IV was
captured by the Seljuk Turks, led by Alp Arslan. For ten points,
identify this 1071 battle which led to the Byzantine loss of Asia
Minor. The {FALL OF THE HOUSE OF USHER} The quote "Son coeur est un
luth suspendu:/ Sito^t qu'on le touche il re'sonne" from De Be'ranger,
meaning "His heart is a suspended lute: / Whenever one touches it, it
resounds," is placed at the beginning of this short story. Its
narrator is visiting an old friend in response to a letter stating
that he had a mental disorder and desired to see him. The climax comes
when, while the narrator and his friend read a dragon story, the
friend's dead sister Madeline enters the room, and the narrator flees
to see a nearby tarn swallow up the title building, of FTP, which Poe
short story? {PHOSPHOLIPID} Formed from a glycerol base with only two
hydrocarbon chains instead of the usual three, they naturally arrange
themselves into bi-layers with the hydrophilic heads all pointing
outwards and the hydrophobic tails on the inside. This ideal membrane
configuration consists of, for ten points, what molecule whose third
constituent is often a water-seeking phosphate group? The {EMPEROR
JONES} The title character fires one bullet into his gambling friend
Jeff, one on a prison guard, two on a slave auctioneer and a
plantation owner, and one on mysterious critters, which, like all the
others, are only a part of his fevered imagination. Eventually he is
hunted down and killed by the natives of the island on which he had
set himself up as ruler, as the drums in the background continue to
beat incessantly. For ten points, name this 1920 play by Eugene
O'Neill, sometimes called the first expressionist play in America.
{AURORA BOREALIS} (prompt on "northern lights") Thought in the Middle
Ages to be reflections of heavenly warriors, and often accompanied by
cracking sounds, no one knows exactly why they form in the various
patterns that they do, including diffuse, pulsating, curtains, and
arcs. Of course, the immediate cause is known: excitation of oxygen
atoms caused by the solar wind. It's not surprising, then, that their
activity correlates strongly with sunspot activity. For ten points,
what is the scientific name for these "northern lights"? Isaac
{ASIMOV} During a 1941 subway ride, he needed to come up with an idea
for a story, so he looked into a collection of Gilbert and Sullivan
plays he had with him. He saw a picture of the Grenadier Guards in
Iolanthe, which led him to soliders, to military society, to
feudalism, and to the breakup of the Roman Empire. When he reached
John Campbell's office, he told Campbell he was planning a story about
the breakup of the Galatic Empire. FTP, identify the author who thus
accounted for the idea behind his Foundation series. John {STEINBECK}
At Stanford, he studied marine biology, and later led a biological
expedition to the Galapagos Islands, which he recounted in_ The Sea of
Cortez_ with E. F. Ricketts. He writes of the Nazi occupation of a
Scandinavian village in _The Moon is Down_, an account of a tour of
America with his dog in _Travels with Charley_, and of the Mexican
peasants Kino and Juana in _The Pearl_. FTP, identify this Salinas-
born author. {ENGMA} It appears in the words "bank" and "uncle",
though not with its usual spelling. Like m and n, it's nasal, but
unlike m and n, is [+high] and [+back], since it is produced in the
velar region. It's most commonly found in English at the end of
present progressive verb forms. For ten points, what is the name for
this phoneme, usually spelled "ng" in English orthography?
{SUPERFLUOUS MAN} or {SUPERFLUOUS MEN} Characterized by a
disconnectedness from the culture and society in which they live and
frequently an inability to act decisively in key situations, they are
nonetheless often brilliant and high-minded young men whose futures
seem all too promising. Examples include Rudin, Oblomov, and arguably
also Count Alexey Vronsky, but more famous are the earlier heroes such
as Lermontov's Pechorin and Pushkin's Eugene Onegin. For ten points
give the common two-word phrase that describes this ubiquitous
protagonist of the 19th- century Russian novel. the {GOSSAMER} lady
(accept {MICHITSUNA'S MOTHER} before the last phrase) She is known
only by a name indicating her relationship to her son. A professional
poet, her commissioned poems were frequently anthologized during her
lifetime. She was the second wife of Fujiwara no Kaneie, and her major
work is a three-volume chronicle of their love affair. Name this
relative of Lady Murasaki and mother of Michitsuna. {ARTEMIDORUS} This
teacher of rhetoric from Cidnos is the only character in Act 2, Scene
3 of Shakespeare's _Julius Caesar_. He enters, reading a letter, and
then exits to wait for Caesar, hoping to give him the letter as a
petitioner. FTP, identify this man who wrote "Caesar, beware of
Brutus, take heed of Cassius..." in his letter warning Caesar of the
conspiracy against him. {MOUNTAIN MEADOWS} massacre The trial of John
Doyle Lee, leader of its participants, in Beaver in 1875 resulted in a
hung jury, but an 1877 retrial led to Lee's execution at the site of
this event. Sparked by a party of 137 emigrants camped 40 miles from
Cedar City and by government plans to send troops into Utah, it
occured while the attackers, after promising safe conduct, led the
unarmed immigrants toward Cedar City. FTP, identify this 1857 massacre
carried out by Mormon settlers and Paiute Indians, in which everyone
but the children in the emigrant group were killed in an ambush.
Cornelius {JANSEN} A bishop of Ypres at his 1638 death, this Dutch
theologian studied the impact of Lutheran and Calvinist doctrine while
at the University of Louvrain, and supported a return to Augustinian
views. For ten points, identify this author of Augustinus, which
became the basis for the doctrine named for him which incorporated
aspects of Protestant views into Catholicism and was later declared
heretical by the church. 1\. Answer the following about participants
in an enduring literary conceit, A bishop of Ypres at his 1638 death,
this Dutch theologian studied the impact of Lutheran and Calvinist
doctrine while at the University of Louvrain, and supported a return
to Augustinian views. For ten points, identify this author of
Augustinus, which became the basis for the doctrine named for him
which incorporated aspects of Protestant views into Catholicism and
was later declared heretical by the church. the {SECOND} battle of
{SAINT ALBANS} For 10 points: After the Earl of Warwick showed the
wrong face to Queen Margaret's troops, his troops deserted him;
Margaret's troops went on to pillage the town and abbey of the same
name. Because of this lapse of discipline, the City of London warned
Margaret that it would not allow her troops in without a guarantee of
good behavior, effectively buying time for Edward of York. Name the
battle. {HALL} Effect If a magnetic field is applied perpendicular to
the direction of a current flow, the current carriers will feel a
force to the same side regardless of which sign of charge they carry.
For ten points, name this phenomenon, which allowed scientists to
discover that current in wires is actually carried by negative
electrons. Klaus {VON KLITZING} A 1980 study of the Hall effect in
semiconductors at extremely low temperatures showed that the Hall
voltage is actually quantized because the ratio of the Hall voltage to
the current can only be an integer multiple of Planck's constant
divided by the square of the electron charge. For fifteen points, name
the German scientist, a 1985 Nobel Prize winner, who discovered this
phenomenon which is now used to standardize electrical resistances.
Will {ROGERS} Identify the person, 30-20-10:  30: He was killed while
flying in Alaska with Wiley Post, and wrote _The Illiterate Digest_.
20: He joined the Ziegfeld Follies in 1915, and his act consisted of
swinging a lasso while commenting on politics and society.  10: He
once said "I don't make jokes, I just watch the government and report
the facts." {Foucault's Pendulum} This novel is parable about the
dangers of over-interpretation and the endlessly open text. Belbo
performs a cabalistic reading of the internal combustion engine.
Colonel Ardenti mistakes a merchant's delivery list for the secret
plan of the Knights Templar. FTP, identify this Umberto Eco novel in
which the key to the secret of the universe swings in the Saint-
Martin-des- Champs. {Sargasso Sea} The eddy within the North Atlantic
gyre, it lies chiefly between 25 to 35 degrees North and 40 to 70
degrees West. In spite of its name, it is actually more like an ocean
desert, with the lowest amount of life of any sea water. FTP, identify
this title body of water of a Jean Rhys novel, a spawning place for
eels, which is named for the great quantities of seaweed covering it.
Sir Alfred {Hitchcock} He attended the University of London where he
studied engineering before beginning his work in the motion picture
industry in 1920 designing title cards for the Famous Players-Lasky
Company. In 1925 he directed his first film, _The Pleasure Garden_,
and in 1926 his _The Lodger_ began his career of cinematic thrillers.
FTP, name this director and frequent cameo whose other films include
_Strangers on a Train_ and _Psycho_. "{Song of Myself}" "And what I
assume you shall assume, / For every atom belonging to me as good
belongs to you." Untitled in 1855, it consists of 52 sections of free
verse, which in section 24 the poet proclaims, "Walt Whitman, a
kosmos, of Manhattan the son." FTP, identify this poem whose first
line is "I celebrate myself, and sing myself." {Hesiod} He was told of
his own lowly station in no uncertain terms: "Shepherb bumpkins,
wretched, shameful things, mere bellies! We know how to tell many lies
similar to the truth, and also to sing the truth when we want to." So
saying, the Muses gave him talent and commanded him to write of the
gods. In one of his two surviving complete epics, he recounts the
story of Pandora's box, criticizes his brother Perses for running off
with most of their inheritance, and describes jobs appropriate to each
part of the year. FTP, name this writer of _Works and Days_ and
_Theogony_. {postmodernism} Commonly applied to art and literature,
this philosophical term is not a coherent doctrine but consists of
reactions against essentialism, realism, and foundationalism. There is
the loss of grand narratives which are replaced by meta-narratives.
FTP, identify this term which can describe the philosophies of
Foucault and Derrida, or any other formed in reaction to modern
philosophy. {Parzival} The retelling and completion of a story left
unfinished by Chrtien de Troyes, it starts with Gahmuret's journey to
the east where he fathers the infidel Feirefiz, half brother to the
title character who is clothed in rags by his mother and bumps into
Anfortas, the Fisher King, whom he doesn't recognize at first, though
later he claims the Gral and heals him. FTP, identify this chivalric
character of a Wolfram von Eschenbach romance, which was later made
into an opera by Richard Wagner. {MPEG} or {moving picture experts
group} It works by attempting to predict the motion from frame to
frame in the temporal direction, then using discrete cosine transforms
to organize the redundancy in spatial directions. The DCTs are
performed in small blocks, and the collection of data is Huffman coded
using fixed tables. Recently, the ISO chose Apple's Quicktime software
as the basis for the forthcoming fourth revision of this standard.
FTP, name this ISO standard, perhaps most popular for the ease of
bootlegging that its "layer 3" audio compression provides. {Cannae} It
was Terentius Varro's day to lead the troops. The other consul, Paulus
Aemilius supposedly promised Fabius Maximus that he would try to
prevent any hasty engagements, but ended up dying in the fight. As
Hannibal's center retreated, the Romans charged forward and were
encircled as the wings flanked them. FTP, name this 216 BCE battle of
the Second Punic War, which crushed the Roman army. {Songs without
Words} Only five out of the approximately fifty pieces were given
names by their composer, and three of those names were "Venetian
Gondola Song." Others have picked up nicknames such as "Hunting Song,"
"Spring Song," and "The Bee's Wedding." The first "book" was published
as "Melodies for the Pianoforte," while the second was formally titled
"Lieder ohne Worte." The entire collection is now named according to a
phrase found in a letter by Fanny Mendelssohn. FTP, name this
collection composed by Felix Mendelssohn, so named because its songs
are impressionistic in nature. "The {Birthmark}" Aylmer's gift of a
rapidly growing flower to his wife Georgiana dies immediately upon her
touching it. His attempt to photograph her leaves only a blurry
outline of his wife. He flaunts before her an elixir of his own
devising with which he claims "freckles may be washed away as easily
as the hands are cleansed," though his attempts to do so end only with
her death. FTP, identify this Nathaniel Hawthorne story about a pygmy
sized handprint on Georgiana's cheek. {Pentheus} He has been
identified as an ascetic martyr, killed in his crusade against the
irrational tide of religious fanaticism. Others suggest that he was a
myopic psychopath who was unable to accept human nature as it stood,
and tried to suppress it. Still others seem him as sexually repressed,
as signified by his assuming the garb of a woman in order to see his
mother's wild orgies. In the end, though, the Maenads care nothing
about these critical opinions - they, along with his mother, tear him
limb from limb and affix his head to a staff during a religiously
induced frenzy. FTP, identify this son of Agave and cousin to
Dionysus. Nelson Aldrich {Rockefeller} Educated at Dartmouth College,
in 1940 he was appointed coordinator of inter-American affairs by FDR.
Considered one of the era's leading experts on Latin America, he
became Assistant Secretary of State in charge of relations with Latin
America in 1944 and later served under Truman as chairman of the
Advisory Board in International Development for the Four-Point
Program. FTP, name this politician who put the 25th Amendment to work
on December 19, 1974 when he was sworn in to replace Gerald Ford as
Vice-President of the United States. Charles {Lyell} This Scotsman
graduated in 1819 from Oxford and originally went to study law in
London, but his passion for amateur geology began to consume his time.
He was the first to divide the Tertiary period into the Eocene,
Miocene, and Pliocene epochs. He published _Principles of Geology_ in
1830 and followed it up in 1838 with _Elements of Geology_. FTP, name
this geologist best known for arguing that the Earth's features were
the product of millions of years of activity and laying the foundation
for evolutionary biology. {Jacobins} Originally founded as the Brenton
Club in 1789, it was made up of Brittany delegates to the National
Assembly. It split in July, 1791 over a petition calling for the
removal of Louis XVI after his attempted escape from France, and many
of the moderates left to join the rival Club of Feuillants. FTP, name
this influential group during the French Revolution who took their
best known name from their meeting place at a former Dominican
monastery on Rue St. Jacques. The {Book of the Duchess} The narrator,
in his eighth year of a lovesick malady, reads a version of Ovid's
tale of Ceyx and Alcione, after which he falls asleep. In his dream,
he goes on a hunt for a hart, whereupon he meets a man in black who
has lost his fair lady White. FTP, identify this poem by Geoffrey
Chaucer, one of his first major works, written for John of Gaunt after
the death of his wife Blanche. {sunspots} In the seventeenth century,
they exhibited a long quiescent period called the Maunder minimum. The
similar Spoerer minimum occurred in the fifteenth century, and earlier
quiet intervals have been inferred. Since the beginning of the
eighteenth century, variations in their number have shown the fairly
regular period, noted by Samuel Heinrich Swabe, of 11 years. FTP, name
these most-visible signs of solar activity. {Klinefelter} syndrome
This sex chromosomal anomaly includes the Y chromosome, which is
enough to express the testis determining factor and cause
masculinzation. However, these individuals are often sterile, exhibit
underdeveloped external genitalia, breast development,
disproportionally long limbs, and are frequently mentally retarded.
FTP, name this form of trisomy in which an individual sexed as a male
has an extra X chromosome. {flashbulb} memories After the Challenger
explosion, psychologists interviewed college freshmen, repeating the
questioning three years later. While emotionally powerful, it was
found these memories weren't completely accurate, though the person's
confidence in their accuracy was extremely high. FTP, identify this
type of memory which is formed when someone learns of an extremely
shocking or emotional event, which for many people over 45 is
remembering where they were when they heard of JFK's assassination.
{founder} effect A striking example is found on the island of Tristan
de Cunha. Settled by fifteen people in 1814, as of the late 1960's
their 240 descendants displayed four cases of retinisis pigmentosa, a
rare form of progressive blindness, and nine were known to be
carriers. If a few individuals from any population are isolated, they
are unlikely to have the same frequency of alleles as the parent
population and this type of genetic drift occurs. FTP, name it. {King
Crimson} Its first incarnation lasted from 1969 to 1972, with the
guitarist as the only constant member. The second incarnation, formed
in 1972, managed to hold on to more members, including Yes drummer
Bill Bruford. It too disbanded, however, after releasing 1974's _Red_.
The third incarnation, including Tony Levin, Adrian Belew, and
omnipresent guitarist Robert Fripp, was the group's most commercially
successful incarnation, due to albums like _Beat_ and _Discipline_.
FTP, name this progressive rock band, which took its name from the
lyrics of the title track to its debut release, _In the Court of the
Crimson King_. {Debye-Hueckel} limiting la  w Formulated in 1923, it
treats ions as point charges interacting by Coulomb's law and the
solvent as a continuous medium characterized by a dielectric constant.
This is an oversimplification, as the "lumpiness" of the solvent is
not negligible when operating on the size scale of ions. However, its
importance lies not in its accuracy, which is poor under most
circumstances, but in its ability to correctly predict limiting slopes
of the mean ionic activity coefficient vs. the molality of a solution.
FTP, name this law of physical chemistry used in the study of
electrolyte solutions. {In the Steppes of Central Asia} or {In Central
Asia} or other equivalents This poem, perhaps its conductor's most
universally famous work, was commissioned in 1879 and included among a
series of tableaux vivants marking the Silver Jubilee of Tsar
Alexander II. An explicit, detailed program note prepared for its
premiere details the story of a caravan's passage while guarded by
Russian soldiers. Thomas {Carlyle} When Yeats asked William Morris
which writers had inspired the socialist movement, he replied that
Ruskin and this author had, though "someone should have been beside
[him] and punched his head every five minutes." His work _Sartor
Resartus_ gives an account of the life and opinions of Professor
Diogenes Teufelsdršch, an imaginary philosopher. James {Rosenquist}
After having daydreams of being nuked while painting billboards, this
man went into art, painting the multi-paneled _F-111_ depicting
lightbulbs, mushroom clouds, and automotive tail fins against the
figure of the namesake bomber. Other works include _Slipping off the
Continental Divide_ and _Area Code_. Claes {Oldenburg} Some of his
non-works include proposals for a colossal peeled banana in Times
Square, and an enormous block of concrete to be inscribed with the
names of war heroes, then placed at the intersection of two major
thoroughfares. Strangely enough, he has never been commissioned to
execute one of his monuments by the City of New York. {8} (the
identity, three rotations, and four reflections) The symmetry group of
a plane figure is defined as the set of all motions of that figure
such that the figure is invariant under the motions - i.e., you put a
circle in, you get a circle of the same size and shape, at the same
place in the plane, back. How many elements are there in the symmetry
group for a square centered at the origin? You have 15 seconds. {Ems
telegram} or {Ems dispatch} Believing a war with France would help
kindle German nationalism, Bismarck used this dispatch from King
William I to make it look as if the king had insulted the French
ambassador. The result was a declaration of war on France's part,
leading to the Franco-Prussian War. Identify this communication. Peggy
{O'Neill} {Eaton} (accept either) or John {Eaton} For 10: Jackson's
Secretary of War married a woman he had been having an affair with
when her husband died at sea. When the wives of Washington society
refused to associate with her, Jackson commanded his Cabinet members
to receive her. The scandal lead to his resignation as well as
Secretary of State Martin Van Buren. FTP, name either the woman or her
husband. {mandala} It is the name given to the traditional form of
foreign policy found in the _Arthasastra_. The name, from the Sanskrit
for "circle," reflects the nature of the policy. Neighboring states
are assumed to generally be hostile toward one another. The constant
struggle between survival and expansion is then acted out in
concentric circles of potential friends and enemies. Name this theory
FTP. {delay} conditioning In this type of conditioning, the interval
between conditional stimulus and unconditional stimulus is quite long.
Early in training, the conditional responses tend to start during the
beginning of the conditional stimulus and continue right through to
the beginning of the unconditional stimulus. Late in training,
conditional responses begin to occur about midway through the
conditional stimulus. The {Svetambara} and the {Digambara} For five
points apiece, fifteen for both, name the two branches, or traditions,
of Jainism, one meaning "white-robed" whose adherents follow a canon
of scripture containing the sermons and dialogues of Mahavira, and the
other of which means "sky-clad" whose observers believe the original
teachings have been lost but that the original message has been
preserved and whose monks and nuns vow nudity. "A {Very Old Man with
Enormous Wings}" Pelayo, upon returning from throwing dead crabs into
the sea, finds an angel face down in the mud of his courtyard. He
proceeds to lock him up in a hen coop. At first the villagers crowd
around his cage, but eventually they find a young girl who was turned
into a spider more interesting and leave the angel alone. {the
Petrified Forest} Amidst threats of the presence of the outlaw Mantee
a drifter and former author named Alan Squier meets and falls in love
with Gabby Maple, and young girl who longs to leave the Arizona desert
town where she lives and go to France to be with her mother. When
Mantee shows up Squier, who respects his Robin Hood-like nobility,
makes an unusual request that Mantee kill him so he can leave his life
insurance to Gabby, which Mantee does. This is, FTP, a brief synopsis
of what play by Robert Sherwood? {Trajan} (Marcus Ulpius Trajanus) In
AD 98 this man was made Roman emperor and spent a few years reviewing
the military situation in the provinces before undertaking war to
conquer Dacian, using the wealth of the gold mines there to finance a
renovation of the Roman forum. Though later expeditions against
Parthia, depicted in his famous column, were less successful, his
respect for the Senate and his fairness led him to be designated as
one of the Five Good Emperors. FTP name this emperor, the successor of
Nerva and succeeded by Hadrian. the {complementarity} principle First
posited in 1928, this principle is in agreement with the de Broglie
theory of matter-waves in its assertion that certain phenomena, such
as light and electrons, can be described in terms of waves or in terms
of particles. As such, a complete understanding of these pheneomna can
never be achieved by describing them as one or the other, but must
employ both descriptions of their properties. his is, FTP, an
extremely simplistic summary of what tenet, the brainchild of Niels
Bohr? Saint {Timothy} According to legend this man was the first
bishop of Ephesus who was martyred when he tried to stop the orgiastic
celbrations of Diana there and was beaten to deth with sticks by the
natives there. Son of a Gentile father and a devout Jewish mother
named Eunice, he was responsible for the founding of the Christian
community at Berea with Silas and did missionary work in Macedonia and
Thessalonika with the Apostle Paul. FTP name this missionary, whose
letter from Paul is one of the Pastoral epistles. {Kristin
Lavransdatter} After breaking her engagement to Simon Andresson she
marries the adventurer Erlend Nikalausson, and after surviving an
attempt on her life by one of Erlend's former lovers she lived with
him at Husaby and bore him seven sons. Erlend's irresponsibility
causes the breakup of their marriage, however, and after the death of
her father she returns to her home at Jšrungaard before entering a
convent, where she later dies of the Plague. This is, FTP, the title
character of what four-part saga by Sigrid Undset? {Die FreischŸtz
(The Free-shooter)} A forester named Max longs for the hand of Agathe,
the daughter of the chief forester Cuno, but his lack of success in
marksmanship contests puts the marriage in jeopardy. Another forester,
Caspar, offers his assisstance in the form of seven magic bullets cast
by the his friend Black Huntsman, which Max accepts, not knowing that
six will hit whatever they are aimed at but the seventh belongs to the
Black Hunstman, who intends to direct the bullet at Agathe. Such is
the premise of, FTP, what opera by Carl maria von Weber? {Moldova}
Lying south of the Carpathians on the Russian platform, this nation is
amply supplied with water from a network of rivers including the Prut,
which flows into the Danube and forms its border with Romania, and the
Dneistr. To the south the Budzhak plain forms its southern boundary,
which, like its boundaries to the north and west, is shared with the
Ukraine. FTP name this former Soviet republic whose capital is
Chisninau. The {Tempest} On one bank of a small stream stands what
appears to be the ruin of a brick-constructed bridge and a young man
carrying a staff and fashionably dressed in a red jacket, yellow hose.
He is looking across the stream at a woman sitting in a grove wearing
only a small cape and suckling a child. FTP name this painting by
Giorgione, originally lacking a title, whose depiction of a bolt of
lightning illuminating a grey sky in the background is the only
evidence of the storm from which the painting gets its present name.
{Atalanta} Though she did not actively murder him, this woman was
responsible for the death of Meleager, the slayer of the Calydonian
Boar, whose determination to give her the spoils in reward for her
being the first to wound the beast led to tragic results. Daughter of
king Schoneus of Scyros, she was later responsible for many murders
until Aphrodite helped Hippomenes put an end to her homicidal game.
FTP name this mythlogical woman who challenged any man who wanted to
marry her to a race and killing all losers, finally beaten by her
desire for golden apples thrown by Hippomenes which caused her to lose
to him. {Jenny Gerhardt} Her undoing begins when an affair with
Senator Brander results in pregnancy and the birth of her daughter,
Vesta. Brander dies before he can marry her and she is instead drawn
into a relationship with the wealthy playboy Lester Kane, who is later
forced to leave her due to his family's disapproval, and though he
marries Letty Gerald they remain in love until his death. These are,
FTP, the misfortunes of title character of a work by Theodore Dreiser?
William {Wollaston} A lake in Saskatchewan and the most common form of
calcium silicate is named for this man. Born in 1766, this man was
trained to be a doctor and practiced medicine until 1800, when he and
fellow chemist Smithson Tennant entered into a partnership to produce
pure platinum, a process kept secret until shortly before until his
death which made him wealthy and which lead to his most famous
discoveries. FTP name this chemist whose research enabled him to
discover rhodium and platinum. {anomie} Sociologist Robert K. Merton
has made extensive studies of this condition, which he relates to the
rise in crime in modern industrial societies due to frustration caused
the inability of individuals to achieve their cultural and material
goals. First studied by ƒmile Durkheim, this condition arises when the
deterioration of societal and legal boundaries to human wants and
desires leads to a limitlessness of want which can leads to violence
and suicide. FTP name this state, whose name derives from the greek
for "lawless". the {Jacquerie} Its origins came in the depradations
caused by English mercenaries following the battle of Poitiers and a
series of tax hikes made by the future Charles V in the effort to
ransom Jean II. On May 1358 violence erupted in Compigne when forces
under Guillaume Cale slaughtered a large number of arostocrats and by
June it had spread to Paris before it was crushed by Gaston Phoebus de
Foix and Charles II of Navarre. FTP identify this uprising, named for
the contemptuous name given to peasants by aristocrats, a term which
was later applied to any peasant revolt. {Wilhelm Meister} When we
first encounter this character he is an idealistic youth who longs to
be a great artist, and though he lacks discipline he displays
generosity towards a gypsy girl named Mignon, whom he rescues from an
abusive guardian. Sobered by the eventual death of Mignon, and guided
by the machinations of the secret Tower society, he matures and
eventually comes to use his intellect as a surgeon. FTP name this
character, whose Apprenticeship and Travels form a two-part
bildungsroman by Johann Wolfgang Von Goethe. {phenomenology} This
philosophy was later very influential to such existentialists as
Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Jean-Paul Sartre, and Martin Heideggar, who
uses the word in the title of several of his works. It espouses the
scientific analysis of observation by epoche, or liberation of
preconceived notions, eidetic reduction, where the essence of a thing
is intuited, and the sorting of the different aspects of a thing into
one unified observation. FTP name this philosophical doctrine, the
brainchild of Edmund Husserl. James P. {Joule} In later life this man
worked with William Thomson Lord Kelvin, describing the cooling
created by the expansion of gasses, the effect named for them. Born in
1818, in 1835 this man studied under Dalton at the University of
Manchester before publishing his study of the mathematical description
of the rate at whhich resistance in a circuit converts electrical
energy into heat, P=Isquared R, the law also named for him. FTP name
this physicist, after whom the standard unti of work is also named.
{canon} From the Greek for reed, this word has several definitions
applying to Church matters: the part of the Mass following the
Sanctus, a clergyman serving in a Cathedral, the law of the church,
and the list of saints accepted in Catholicism are all described by
it.. Musically it is applied to a composition which features the
strict repetition of a theme either simultaneously at the same pitch
or consecutively in a different key, and in general parlance it is
used to describe an entire list or genre of things. FTP identify this
word, popularised by Harold Bloom and Johann Pachabel. {Yellow Sea
(Hwang Hai)} Its major inlets are the Korea Bay and the Gulf of
Chilhi, to which it is connected by the Chilhi peninsula. Lying North
of the East China Sea, from which it is separtated by an east-west
line connecting Cheju Island with mainland China, it's major harbors
include Tsingtao, Shanghai, Inchon, and Port Arthur. FTP name this
body of water into which drain such rivers as the Yang-tze, Yalu, and
Hwang-Ho, from whose silt deposits it gets its name. {The Egoist}
Though he is loved his neighbor Laetitia Dale, the title character
chooses to become engaged first to Constantia Durham, who runs away
with the the soldier Harry Oxford, and then to Clara Middleton, who
chooses to marry his cousin Vernon Whitford. Defeated, he courts
Laetitia, and though she no longer who consents to marry him if he
willfund his relative Crossjay's entrance to the Marines. Such are the
adventures of self-centred Willoughby Patterne in what novel by George
Meredith? {Queen Anne's Lace} A member of the Apiaceae family, this
plant is known by many names, such as Devil's Plague, in reference to
its stubborn hardiness, and Wild Carrot, in reference to its
relationship to the cultivated carrot of which it is an ancestor.
Eurasian in origin but now almost cosmoplitan, it has divided leaves,
an enlarged, edible but bitter root, and umbrels which contain a
purple flower in the middle surrounded by the white flower resembling
the fabric from which it gets its most famous name. FTP name this
plant associated with the successor of William III. the _Lady of the
Lake Identify the following character from legend.  30 pts: One legend
has it that Lancelot was raised by this person, from which his surname
is derived.  20 pts: Also known as Nineve, in some legends she is the
wife of King Pelleas, but in others she is the lover of Merlin.  10
pts: The most famous legend about her is her giving Excalibur to
Arthur from the dwelling from which she gets her most famous name.
E.T,A. {Hoffman} 15 pts: This man made a small splash in the musical
world with the opera _Undine_.  10 pts: He is better knwon for such
works as the novels _The Devil's Elixir_ and _The Serapion Brothers_.
5 pts: He is best known for his short stories which were themselves
the inspiration for an opera by Offenbach. {diamagnetism} Also named
by Faraday, this type of magnetism is characteristic of materials that
line up at right angles to a nonuniform magnetic field and that partly
expel from their interior the magnetic field in which they are placed.
First observed in 1778 by S.J. Brugmans in bismuth and antimony, it is
actually exhibited by all materials as the strong external magnetic
field speeds up and slows down according to Lenz's Law, but it is
masked by stronger magnetic attractions, like ferromagnetism and
paramagnetism. {antiferromagnetism} This type of magnetism is found in
materials in low temperatures which adjacent ions behave as tiny
magnets spontaneously aligning at relatively low temperatures into
opposite arrangements so that the substance exhibits almost no gross
external magnetism. Observed especially in manganese oxide, it
disappears abovethe NŽel point named after the 1970 Nobel Laureate who
studied the phenomena. 6\. Identify the founders of the following
ancient philosphical schools on a This type of magnetism is found in
materials in low temperatures which adjacent ions behave as tiny
magnets spontaneously aligning at relatively low temperatures into
opposite arrangements so that the substance exhibits almost no gross
external magnetism. Observed especially in manganese oxide, it
disappears abovethe NŽel point named after the 1970 Nobel Laureate who
studied the phenomena. {Chicken Pox} Also known as varicelli, a
reference to the varicelli virus which causes it, this disease is a
highly contagious disese which can cause respiratory illness and in
rare cases can lead to encephalitis, Reye's Syndrome, and hepatitis.
For the most part, however, it is distinguished by a rash and severe
but temporary physical discomfort for which it is most famous.
{Whooping cough} (accept, of course, {pertussis}) Caused by a strain
of a Bordetelle virus, this illness can lead to pneumonia and can even
cause brain damage due to the severe nature of the respiratory
problems it causes. Distinguished by severe coughing and breathing
problems , for which it gets its name, it is rarely encountered now
due to the effective vaccines developed against it. {Seychelles} Lying
1000 miles east of Kenya, this nation consists of two island groups of
which the one, a series of about seventy corals islands, supplies the
guano which plays an important role in its economy, while the other
contains the islands of Silhouette, Aride, La Digue, and MahŽ, on
which its capital, Victoria, is located. {Turner's} syndrome Occuring
mainly in women, this defect is characterised by a low hairline,
webbed neck, a shield-shaped chest with widely spaced nipples and
heart malformation. Caused in most cases by damage to the second X
chromosome of the sex chromosome resulting in the pattern XO or XXX,
its most revealing symptom is the total lack or only rudimentary
traces of ovaries, though in many cases affected women are otherwise
normal. {cycloid} First studied by Cusa and named by Galileo, who had
studied it for forty years, this construct is the locus of a point at
distance h from the centre of a circle of radius a that rolls along a
straight line. If h < a it is known as a curtate, while if h is
greater than a it is known as a prolate form of this figure.
{catenary} It can be defined either as the locus of the focus of a
parabola rolling along a straight line, the evolute of the tractrix,
and the locus of the mid- point of the vertical line segment between
the curves Òe to the xÓ and Òe to the negative xÓ. It is best defined,
however, as the the shape of a perfectly flexible chain suspended by
its ends and acted on by gravity, hence the name given to it by
Huygens, which is from the Latin for "chain". {L}ight {E}mitting
{D}iode (or {LED}) These items, functionally the opposite of solar
cells, are found in many commercial electronic applications, and are
pn-junction semiconductors with a large forward bias the produces a
large excess concentration of electrons on the p side and holes on the
n side of the juntion. Under these conditions, a photon emerges when
the electrons and holes recombine. FTP name this type of diode. Sean
{O'Casey} This playwright who was awarded the Hawthornden prize in
1926, wrote essays like _The Flying Wasp_, and also wrote a six-volume
autobiograpy ending with _Sunset and Evening Star_. Unable to read
until the age of twelve, his first play produced by the Abbey Theater
was _The Shadow of a Gunman_. FTP, who is this author of _The Plough
and the Stars_, _The Star Turns Red_, and _Juno and the Paycock_? Jean
Baptiste Donatien de Vimeur, Comte de {Rochambeau} A Marshal of the
French Army, he was in sympathy with the French Revolution and was
commander of the northern army. Upset with the revolutionaries, he
retired in July 1792 and was imprisoned during the Reign of Terror but
was saved from the guillotine by the fall of Robespierre. In 1803
Napoleon sent him to Haiti where they were defeated by the slave
revolt of Toussaint L'Overture. However, his greatest success was also
achieved in the new world. FTP, identify this French General, who in
1781along with George Washington, accepted the surrender of Cornwalis
at Yorktown. {Les Fleurs du Mal} (accept The {Flowers of Evil} from
idiots) Dedicated to the "magician of French letters" Theophile
Gautier, its introductory poem "To the Reader" is followed by such
sections as "Le Vin," "La Mort," and "Tableaux Parisiens." Although
the first section begins with "Benediction," the collection is more
noted for the sensual or grotesque imagery of "Les Litanies de Satan,"
"L'invitation au Voyage," and "Spleen." FTP name the 1857 volume of
poetry by Charles Baudelaire. {Tamora} Defeated in war, her son
Alarbus is sacrificed to appease the victorious army. Based on the
vengeful characters of Seneca, she swears revenge on her enemies but
is fed the flesh of her two youngest sons before being stabbed to
death. FTP name the queen of the Goths who uses her husband, the
Emperor Saturninus, and her moorish lover Aaron as instruments of her
vengeance against Titus Andronicus. Dr. Mae C. {Jemison} Born in 1961
in Alabama, she graduated from Stanford in 1977 with degrees in
chemical engineering and African-American studies. She graduated from
Cornell medical school in 1981 and served as a physician in the Peace
Corps for 2 and a half years. FTP name the woman, who with the flight
of the space shuttle Endeavor in 1992 became the first African-
American woman in space. Giorgio {Vasari} The descendant of potters,
he claimed to have been taught by Signorelli and Michelangelo, but his
teacher was probably Andrea del Sarto. After the assassination of his
friend and patron Alessandro de'Medici, he built his reputation by
decorating the huge hall of the Palazzo della Signoria in only 100
days, and by designing the tomb of Michelangelo. FTP name the artist,
the architect of the Uffizi, whom historian Paolo Giovio urged to
write his 1550 and 1568 editions of "Lives of the Artists." {Main
Sequence} Stars ( or Main Sequence Dwarfs) These stars can range from
1/3 solar masses to 50 solar masses, and have luminosity from 1 one-
hundreths of the sun to one million times the sun. The surface
temperature can range from 2000 kelvin to 60,000 kelvin. FTP give the
common name of the large majority of stars on a Hertzprung-Russell
diagram, which are homogeneous mixtures except in the core, and which
fuse hydrogen into helium. Francis William {Aston} This chemist first
made a splash in the science world when, in 1913, he announced the
separation of two isotopes of neon by means of thermal diffusion.
Later, while working under Rutherford at the Cavendish Laboratory, he
built a machine that separated isotopes by their mass. FTP name the
man who identified 212 of the naturally occuring isotopes with his
mass-spectrograph, which won him the 1922 Nobel prize in Chemistry.
{Guadalcanal} First occupied by the Japanese shortly after the battle
of the Coral Sea, this island saw seven major naval battles over the
next eight months, including the Battle of Santa Cruz Island and the
Battle of Tassafronga. FTP name this island, home to Henderson Field,
the first US offensive in the Pacific during the Second World War.
Claude {Debussy} In 1915, this man composed _En blanc et noir_, a
four-hand piano work whose third movement was dedicated to Igor
Stravinsky. His chamber works include a _Rhapsodie for Saxophone_, and
_Syrinx_, written for unaccompianied flute. Although he planned many
operas, including two based on works by Poe, he only completed one, a
setting of a Maeterlinck play. FTP, who is this French composer of
_Pelleas et Melisande_, _La Mer_, and _Prelude to the Afternoon of a
Faun_? {Russell's} paradox Independently discovered by Ernst Zermelo,
this mathematical consequence was first communicated by its author in
1902 to Gottlob Frege. It defines a set A which contains all objects
that are not members of themselves. If A is not an element of A, it
meets the requirements to be in A. If A is an element of A, then it
cannot be an element of A by the definition of the set. FTP, what is
this important paradox of early set theory developed by the British
co-author of Prinicipia Mathematica? Le {Bourgeois Gentilhomme} or The
{Would-Be Gentleman} This play is described as a "comedy-ballet," and
Jean-Baptiste Lully wrote music for it and took the part of the Mufti.
Allegedly inspired by the visit of a Turkish envoy to Versailles which
failed to notice its opulence, Cleonte disguises himself as the son of
the Grand Turk in order to dupe the title character into granting him
his daughter's hand. FTP, what is this Moliere play in which M.
Jourdain studies dance, fencing, and philosophy in an attempt to make
himself a gentleman? {Krebs} or {Citric Acid} cycle 4 molecules of
carbon dioxide, 6 molecules of reduced nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide, and 2 molecules of reduced FAD are produced through two
iterations of this process. Beginning with Acetyl-CoA, transition
compounds include fumaric, malic, and oxaloacetic acids, and two
molecules of ATP are also synthesized. FTP, what is this stage of
respiration, a cycle named after either its British discoverer or one
of the acids in the pathway? Yukio {Mishima} or {Kimitake} Hiraoka In
1968, this author founded the Shield Society, and two years later,
published _Sun and Steel_, an autobiographical essay. In his novel
_Confessions of a Mask_, he dealt with the discovery of his
homosexuality and the problems that it caused. FTP, who is this author
of _The Sound of Waves_, _The Temple of the Golden Pavillion_, and the
tetralogy _Sea of Fertility_, who committed ritual suicide in 1970?
{Athaliah} or {Athalie} The wife of Joram, king of Judah, she murdered
42 princes in order to gain the throne after the death of her son
Ahaziah. After ruling for 6 years she was killed by a mob and the
rightful king, Joash, regained the throne. FTP who is this daughter of
Ahab and Jezebel, subject of the last tragedy by Racine? {Yoruba}
Historically, peoples of this ethnic group were known for trading in
woodcuts and bronze castings. During the 1600s they established the
empire of Oyo, an animistic kingdom located between Dahomey and the
Niger River. Under British control, this Sudanic-speaking tribe became
centered around the city of Ibadan. FTP, identify this ethnic group of
southwest Nigeria, whose most famous member is Hakim Olajuwon. The
{Wild Hunt} This Celtic myth consists of a pack of huge black hounds
that have licks of green fire for their eyes and tongues, and their
master, a man with crowned by a set of stag antlers and wearing a suit
of black leather. FTP name this group that appears when there is evil
in the land and attempts to track in down, drawing in innocent
bystanders in the process. A {Night to Remember} _The Night Lives On_,
the 1986 follow-up to this work, clarifies the forensic evidence,
covers the American and British Inquiries, and investigates the
location of the Californian. One of the first books to utilize, in
print, what has come to be known as "cinematic style", the author
narrated an event in one area and then repeatedly cut away to a
concurrent scene in another area. A best seller in 1955, the 1958
movie adaptation, directed by Roy Baker won a Golden Globe for Best
English Language Foreign Film. FTP, identify this non-fictional
account of the R.M.S. Titanic, written by Walter Lord. Count Carlo
{Gozzi} A member of the Granelleschi society, he sought to preserve
the purity of Tuscan literature, rejecting the use of dialectas well
as the influence of Moliere and other foreign writers. His plays
revived the stock characters of commedia dell'arte and often satirized
his french-influenced rivals Chiari and Goldoni. FTP name this 18th
century playwright of _Re Turandot_ and _Fable of the Love of 3
Oranges_. {prions} Discovered in the 1980s their association with
certain neurological diseases continues to be a subject of scientific
investigation. The brain tissues of victims of the these diseases have
revealed the presence of abnormal patches or flat areas (plaques) of
protein. Analysis of these plaques from the brains of sheep led to
isolation of protein particles only one- hundredth the size of the
smallest known viruses. FTP identify this type of infectious agent
discovered by Stanley Prusiner. Margaret {Atwood} She has written nine
books of poetry, and a book of critical essays on her national
literature called _Survival_. In 1983 she was asked to edit the New
Oxford compilation of Canadian Verse, but her true fame rests on her
reputation as a fiction writer who stresses feminist themes, apparent
in novels such as _Surfacing_ and _the Edible Woman_. FTP name this
author of the distopian novel _The Handmaids Tale_. {Kiribati} It
straddles both the equator and the international date line in the
Pacific Ocean. Composed of 33 islands, grouped into the Line Islands
and the Phoenix Islands, it was originally part of the Gilbert and
Ellice Islands colony until 1975, when the Ellice Islands gained
independence as Tuvalu. It took its name this based on the
pronunciation of "Gilbert" in the indigenous language, which has only
13 letters in its alphabet. FTP name this nation with capital at
Tarawa. Alfred {Binet} This man began his career working with Jean
Martin Charcot conducting research on hypnotism. Taking his cue from
the work of Francis Galton he proposed to study cognitive ability
directly and worked on the idea of Individual psychology with Victor
Henri in an 1896 article. However his greatest contribution was
accomplished with another partner, Theodore Simon, with whom he
created a valid way of distinguishing between normal children and
those with mental deficiency. FTP name the French psychologist whose
scale of intelligence would become associated with Stanford
University. {Hecate} A descendant of the Titans and a cousin of
Artemis she is clearly a fertility deity  as she can make the earth
produce in plenty, she is also a goddess of roads and cross-roads, the
latter being considered the center of ghostly activities. This is
appropriate as she is considered the queen of witches and her home is
the depths of the Underworld FTP name this triple faced goddess of
magic. W.C. {Williams} This writer incorporated the commonplace
details of American everyday life into his works, and derided TS Eliot
for giving poetry back to the academics. Conceiving of the poem as an
object, he developed his variable foot and wheelbarrow styles in
collections such as _The Tempers_, _Sour Grapes_, and _Pictures from
Brueghel_. FTP name this poet who sustained a life-long medical
practice in New Jersey, best known for _Paterson_. {1850} Levi invents
his blue jeans, the Navy stops flogging sailors, Pinkerton opens a
detective agency, Dickens publishes "David Copperfield," Bunsen dreams
up his burner, Folger offers coffee ready-roasted and ground, Tennyson
writes "'Tis better to have loved and lost...". FTP these events all
occured in what year, when California and Maine formally entered the
union. {Lenz}'s law A particular case of Le Chateliers principle it
states that when a current is caused to flow in an electrical
conductor by a change in the external magnetic field surrounding the
conductor, the direction of flow of the current is such as to produce
a magnetic field opposing the original change. FTP identify this law
often used to explain the behavior of inductors and named after its
Estonian discoverer. {Arrangement in Gray and Black} (accept
ÒWhistlerÕs MotherÓ on early buzz, otherwise prompt and look stern.) A
landscape painting in a light shaded frame hangs in the background. To
the left are black curtains. The main subject is sitting and her legs
are propped up on a small wooden box. We see her from the side and her
billowy black dress covers much of the paintings surface area, while
her  hands rest on her lap. FTP identify this painting subtitled
portrait of the artists mother by Whistler, which Mr. Bean ÒrestoresÓ
by coating a poster of it with lacquer. {Marcellus} The name's the
same: one was a five-time consul of Rome, who conquered Syracuse in
212 BC and died while fighting against Hannibal. The other was a guard
of Elsinore Castle who proclaimed one day, "Something is rotten in the
state of Denmark." For ten points, what name did these two share, one
the "sword of Rome," the other played by Jack Lemmon in Kenneth
Branagh's version of _Hamlet_? {The Three Sisters} As the play opens
its main characters are enjoying the sound of the approaching military
band to their small garrison town. Along with their brother Andrey
they dream of alife away from their provincial life. Trying to escape
their drab lives Masha has an affair with an officer while Irina
marries a local Baron. By the end of the play however all their dreams
are unrealized. FTP name this 1901 play which some consider Anton
Chekhovs greatest. {Wade-Davis} Bill Proposed by a Senator from Ohio,
it never took effect because President Lincoln pocket-vetoed it. This
bill would have required a majority of a state's citizens to fulfill
an oath of allegiance to the  Union, and would have disqualified from
public office anyone who had served in the Confederacy. For ten
points, identify this Civil War Radical Republican bill passed on July
2, 1864, attempting to regulate Reconstruction policies. {Sikh}ism
Founded in the Punjab by Guru Nanak who sought to combine Hindu and
Muslim elements in a single religious creed. It taught "the unity of
God, brotherhood of man, rejection of caste and the futility of idol
worship." Its worshippers are readily identifiable by their turbans.
They take a vow not to cut their hair as well as not to smoke or drink
alcoholic beverages. When Gobind Singh founded the martial fraternity
Khalsa ("pure"), his followers vowed to keep the five K's, (kesh),
(kangha), (kara), (kachha), and (kirpan). FTP name this religious sect
whose holy city is Amritsar John {Napier} This strict Presbyterian
published his _Rabdologiae_ in 1617 long after graduating from St.
Andrew's University. During the English defense of the Spanish Armada,
he devised warlike machines including primitive tanks in order to
prepare for the forces of Philip II. FTP, name this  mathematician
whose most important contribution to the elements of algebra and
calculus was his 1614 publishing of _Description of the Marvelous
Canon of Logarithms_. John {Dryden} Like Marvell he wrote _Heroic
stanzas on the Death of Oliver Cromwell_. He wrote prodigiously for
the theater including _The Wild Gallant_ and _The Rival Ladies_. But
his most important contribution was to poetry, and his belief that the
value of art lies wholly in workmanship best expressed in works such
as _Alexanders Feast_, _Annus Mirabilis_, and _MackFlecnoe_. FTP name
this 17th century poet most famous for the allegorical _Hind and the
Panther_. {nucleotides} Composed of three subunits: a 5-carbon sugar,
a phosphate group that is joined to one end of the sugar molecule, and
one of several different nitrogenous bases of which there are four
types they are biochemical building blocks FTP name this class of
chemicals, which include guanine  and cytosine, from which nucleic
acids are formed. {Michael Kohlhaas} In this novella set in the 16th
century the titular hero embraces vigilante ways when the government
fails to supply restitution for the loss of his two best horses.
Incensed by the lack of justice present in his society he gathers a
band of men and commits atrocious acts of violence against those that
tricked him. FTP name this 1808 work, the most famous of Heinrich von
Kleist. George Armstrong {Custer} Hist: 30-20-10 name the historical
figure:  30: He was the only soldier in U.S. military history to wear
a velvet uniform, which he designed himself.  20: As lieutenant
colonel of the Seventh Cavalry in 1867, he attempted to whip his men
into shape as Indian hunters against the Cheyennes, Arapahoes, and
Kiowas. After suffering severe losses he ordered all AWOL men shot,
then himself went AWOL to visit his wife.  10: The Indians called him
"Long Hair" because of his blonde locks, and his greatest defeat came
on June 25, 1869, when his column of soldiers fell to a Sioux ambush,
which was recounted to the whites by Curley, a Crow scout who
witnessed the slaughter. Marcus {Garvey} 30-20-10 name the activist:
30: The youngest of eleven children from St. Anne's Bay, Jamaica, in
1907 he led a printers' strike for higher wages.  20: After founding
the Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA) in 1914, he moved
to New York and started a weekly newspaper, _The Negro World_.  10:
Preaching the return of black Americans to Africa, he created the
Negro Star Line in 1919 to provide steamship transportation. Jose
{Marti} Identify the latin American scholar and author:  30: He wrote
a number of essays criticizing the US including Emerson and Jesse
James  20: His best known poetry is included in three collections
Ismaelillo, Versos Libres, and Versos Sencillos.  10: A national hero
in his homeland of Cuba, its main airport is named after him
{Sacramento} Identify the city- 30-20-10  30: Founded in 1849 it
formed an endpoint of the Central Pacific Railroad as well as the Pony
Express.  20: This city contains several points of interest including
Crocker Art Museum, Fort Sutter, and the state capitol.  10: Name this
capital city of California home to the NBAs Kings. William {Hazzlit}
identify the English author  30- his most notable work appeared in
periodicals including the Edinburgh review.  20- later in his life he
criticized his former friends Coleridge and Southey for their
conservatism, later works include _Liber Amoris_ and _The Spirit of
the Age_.  10- after Coleridge he is the most influential of the
Romantic critics and was a great supporter of John Keats. valid
{syllogism}s There are 24 of them, grouped into four so-called
"figures" of six each. For those in Figure I, medieval scholars gave
the names Barbara, Celarent, Darii, and Ferio to the basic "moods",
with the "subaltern" moods named Barbari and Celaront. The consonants
indicate which conversions must be made from the basic moods, while
the vowels indicate the form of each term: positive or negative,
existential or universal. FTP what are these deductive schemes first
described by Aristotle? {Bermuda} Its highest point is the 259-foot-
high peak known as "The Peak", which towers above the main island,
known as "Main Island". It also includes Ireland Island, though it's
3000 miles from Ireland, and over 300 coral islets. Puerto Rico and
the Florida coast are each about a thousand miles away. For 10 points,
name this archipelago, a British colony located 650 miles east of Cape
Hatteras. Glenn Theodore {Seaborg} (Element 106 is now called
Seaborgium.) He has the longest entry in _Who's Who in America_, with
an impressive resume including 10 years in Washington -- the longest
tenure of any Kennedy appointee -- and 3 years as a university
chancellor, after winning the Nobel Prize while still in his thirties.
On August 30, 1997, he received an honor never before bestowed upon
any living person, when the International Union of Pure and Applied
Chemistry named an element after him. FTP name this co- discoverer of
element 106, as well as nobelium, fermium, mendelevium, einsteinium,
curium, americium, plutonium, californium and berkelium. {Piraeus} or
{Piraievs} Situated on Phaleron Bay, this city was protected on the
east by the hill of Munychia, and was destroyed by Sulla in 86 BC.
Following the Peloponnesian War and the establishment of the tyranny
of the Thirty, it was captured by the democratic exiles under
Thrasybulus. Originally fortified under the direction of Themistocles,
its Long Walls were completed around 460 BC. FTP, what is this port
city of Athens? {alpha-helices} (accept {alpha-helix}) They usually
lie along the outside of the molecule, with one side facing the
solution, and the other side facing the hydrophobic interior. They
most commonly includes alanine, glutamic acid, leucine and methionine,
and their average length is about 10 residues, corresponding to three
turns. FTP what are these most common elements of a protein's
secondary structure? {5/4} ({five four}ths) time The first known use
of it in Western music occurs in a 16th-century piece for viols by
Christopher Tye, called "Trust". Some three centuries later, it was
used in the third movement of Chopin's first piano sonata, and then in
the second movement of Tchaikovsky's Pathetique ["pa-tay-TEAK"]
symphony, Gustav Holst's "Mars, the Bringer of War", and Lalo
Shiffrin's theme from "Mission: Impossible". FTP what odd time
signature do these works share with Paul Desmond's 1959 hit for the
Dave Brubeck Quartet, "Take Five"? {Methuselah} or {Methushael} His
son, Lamech, died at the age of 777, five years before the Great
Flood. His father, Enoch, lived 365 years before "God took him". He
himself thus became the first man in the book of Genesis to outlive a
son who had not been murdered or taken by God. However, he died soon
after, in the same year as the Flood. For 10 points, who was this
grandfather of Noah who lived to the age of 969, longer than any other
mortal in the Bible? The {Death of General Wolfe} or The {Death of
Wolfe} "The event to be commemorated happened in the year 1759, in a
region of the world unknown to the Greeks and Romans, and at a period
of time when no warriors who wore such costume existed. The subject I
have to represent is a great battle fought and won, and the same truth
which gives law to the historian should rule the painter." In these
words, the artist of this 1770 work defended it against attacks by
traditionalists led by Sir Joshua Reynolds. FTP name this painting by
Benjamin West, depicting the dying victor at the Battle of Quebec.
{Calchas} When this man committed suicide following an encounter with
Mopsus, the prediction that he would die after meeting his superior in
divination was fulfilled. During his life he foretold the length of
the siege of Troy, advised the construction of the wooden horse, and
demanded the sacrifice of Iphigeneia. FTP, who was this Greek
soothsayer during the Trojan War? {Negev} (or {Ha-Negev} or {Negeb})
Psalms 126:4 describes it as a semi-arid region even in early times.
In the area immediately surrounding Beersheba, rainfall sometimes
measures as much as a foot in some years, making it less dry than most
proper deserts. With an area of approximately 4,700 square miles, it
descends from the Judean Hills in the north, bordered on the east by
the Jordan Rift valley, and the west by the Sinai Peninsula. FTP, name
this arid region of southern Israel, whose named is derived from the
Hebrew for "to dry". {Birches} "I should prefer to have some boy bend
them ...  One by one he subdued his father's trees  By riding them
down over and over again  Until he took the stiffness out of them,
And not one but hung limp, not one was left  For him to conquer. ...
One could do worse than be a swinger of", for 10 points, what sort of
trees in a poem by Robert Frost? Robert {Bork} This noted conservative
was vilified in 1996 by the American Civil Liberties Union for
"actually proposing a constitutional amendment that would allow
Congress, by a simple majority vote, to override any Supreme Court
decision it didn't like." In October 1973, when Elliot Richardson
resigned rather than fire Watergate Special Prosecutor Archibald Cox,
he, as Solicitor General, carried out President Nixon's order to fire
him. FTP, name this former judge, whose writings and actions came back
to haunt him in 1987, when he was rejected by the Senate for a Supreme
Court seat. {Kyrgyz} accept {Kyrgyzstan} or {Kirghizia} According to
the Guinness Book of Records, this people's national epic is the
longest poem in the world, with over half a million lines. Their
trilogy about the chieftains Manas ["ma-NASS"], Semetei and Seitek is
an encyclopedia of traditional stories about battles with the Kalmaks
and migrations from the Altai Mountains to the Talas River Valley in
the Tien Shan. FTP what is this Turkic ethnic group predominating in a
former Soviet republic with its only international airport now named
Manas Bishkek? {Desdemona} On December 8, 1660, this character's role
became the first in the history of English theatre to be played by a
female actress. Just who played the part at Killigrew's theatre that
day is not certain, but it _is_ known that in a U.S. Army production
during the Mexican War, it was played by Ulysses S. Grant. FTP name
this Shakespeare character, a daughter of Brabantio who marries
against the wishes of her Venetian senator father, and ends up being
murdered by her jealous Moorish husband. {Norway} (or {Norge}) A
constituent assembly met in Eidsvoll on May 17, 1814, and drew up a
constitution, declaring itself an independent monarchy with Christian
Frederick as king. Two months later, the country was attacked by its
neighbor, where Napoleon's former Marshal of France was running
things. The new rulers were gracious enough to allow the country to
retain its constitution, but by the Convention of Moss, Charles XIII
was chosen king. FTP name this country that, until 1905, shared its
crown with Sweden. {iron curtain} In the most common modern sense of
this two-word phrase, the first recorded use in English dates from
1920, in a book written by Ethel Snowden, the wife of a British Labour
Party MP. Twenty-six years later, it was made more famous in a speech
given at Westminster College in Fulton, Missouri. "From Stettin in the
Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic," for 10 points, what did Winston
Churchill say had descended across Europe? {Technicolor} It was
invented by Herbert Kalmus, Daniel Comstock, and Ernest Wescott, and
they named it after their alma mater -- MIT. It used a beam-splitting
optical cube, with the red, blue and green portions of the spectrum
being captured on separate bands of black-and-white film. FTP name
this motion picture process. {Julius Caesar} by William Shakespeare
"But hollow men, like horses hot at hand,  Make gallant show and
promise of their mettle;  But when they should endure the bloody spur,
They fail their crests, and like deceitful jades,  Sink in the trial."
These lines, which influenced Eliot's title and themes, are from what
play featuring a conspiracy of men who, like those of the Gunpowder
Plot, resort to violence and who are blinded by their cause? {Effi
Briest} In one of Fontane's best-known works, the Baron von Innstetten
discovers that seven years earlier, his young bride, the title
character, has had an affair with a Major Crampas. His sense of honor
compels him to divorce his wife and to challenge Crampas to a duel, in
which Crampas dies. What is this 1895 novel? {Calcite} Its crystals
belong to the rhombohedral class of the of the hexagonal system which
differentiates it from aragonite which has the same chemical
composition but forms orthorhombic crystals. This mineral which is
composed of anhydrous calcium carbonate figures into the production of
lime, cement, fertilizers, crayons, and building materials. FTP, name
this mineral whose pure transparent form exhibits double refraction
and is therefore used in making polarizing prisms. {Aristides} He was
one of the ten leaders of the Athenians at the battle of Marathon, and
he had a share in the victories at Salamis and Plataea. He proposed a
plan that opposed the naval strategy of Themistocles, but a popular
vote decided against him and he entered exile. FTP, name this Athenian
military leader who was instrumental in organising the Delian
confederacy. {Jerusalem Delivered} (Jerusalemme Liberata) Crusaders
encamped on the plains of Tortosa choose Godfrey for their chief, and
Alandine, king of Jerusalem, prepares his defense of the city. Godfrey
invites Rinaldo to return from the enchanted island so that the city
can be conquered. Armida offers to marry any knight who can kill
Rinaldo, but he eventually seduces her. FTP, this is the plot of what
epic in twenty books --the masterpiece of Torquato Tasso. {Waverly}
novels or series Some of the more obscure works in the series are
_Peveril of the Peak_, _The Abbot_, _Woodstock_, _Quentin Durward_,
and _Castle Dangerous_. Its title also refers to a novel of the same
name by an author who published it anonymously because he did not wish
to admit his withdrawal from poetry. FTP, name this series of novels
that includes _Kenilworth_, _The Heart of Midlothian_, and _Bride of
Lammermoor_. {Merlin} Geoffrey of Monmouth helped create this
character because he adapted a story of a boy, Ambrosius, who had
advised the legendary king Vortigern. Geoffrey futher added to this
man's accomplishments by borrowing another story from northern legend
about a wild man of the woods who had powers of divination. He is also
mentioned in the Vulgate cycle as the prophet if the holy grail,
although the knight he advised never found it. FTP, name this advisor
and magician to Uther Pendragon and King Arthur. {Hamm} He wants his
servant to set an alarm if he leaves so he can be sure that the
servant isn't dead. He wants his painkiller, but it isn't quite time
yet and there isn't any painkiller anyway. He wants to be placed in
the center of the room, but he settles for being roughly in the
middle. FTP, name this character who plays with a 3-legged toy dog and
is pushed around the room by Clov in Samuel Beckett's _Endgame_.
Ingmar {Bergman} His lesser known works include _It Rains on our
Love_, _A Ship Bound for India_, _Port of Call_, and _Summer with
Monika_. His first hit came in 1955 with _Smiles of a Summer Night_.
Although his impressive career spans almost 40 years his films only
won two Academy Awards for Best Foreign Film-in 1959 for _The Virgin
Spring_ and in 1961 for _Through a Glass Darkly_. FTP, name this
director of _Wild Strawberries_. Ludwig {Wittgenstein} He returned to
Cambridge to become a professor of philosophy after he lost a job as
an elementary school teacher for having beaten a dimwitted student.
His later work supports the concepts of family relationships in
language instead of the direct correspondence of elementary principles
and atomic facts. FTP, name this man whose doctoral dissertation at
Cambridge was his widely published and widely misunderstood
masterpiece the _Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus_. {Norma} First
performed on Dec. 26, 1831, at La Scala, Milan, the work calls for
singers of virtuoso caliber. The libretto is by Felice Romani, and
based on the French tragedy by Louis Alexandre Soumet. In the opera,
the title character has given birth to two children by the Roman
proconsul, Pollione. However, Pollione is persuing a young priestess
Adalgisa. When the title character learns of this she prepares to kill
her children. Pollione is captured after the title character summons
the druids to revolt. When she decides that she has betrayed her
people, she jumps into the flames. FTP, name the druid queen and you
also name the Bellini opera. {Mossbauer} effect The first laboratory
test of Einstein's general theory of relativity, and it confirmed the
prediction that the wavelength of electromagnetic radiation, including
gamma rays, increases as the gravitational field increases. Named for
a Cal Tech professor, this effect holds that certain radioactive
atoms, when present in a crystalline structure, emit or absorb gamma
rays in an extremely narrow range of wavelengths. FTP, name this
effect which won for its discoverer the 1961 Nobel Prize in physics.
{Casablanca} Conference At this conference, the invasion of Sicily was
agreed upon and Roosevelt called for unconditional surrender of
Germany, Japan, and Italy. Held from January 14 to 23, 1943 Franklin
Roosevelt and Winston Churchill met in this city to discuss the future
strategic planning for the war. FTP, identify this conference held in
a city in Morocco. David {Ricardo} Early on he wrote An Essay on the
Influence of a Low Price of Corn on the Profits of Stock, which argued
against high tariffs on grain imports. It was with this publication
that he was established as a major proponent of what would become the
concept of free trade. He also is credited with determining the theory
of comparative advantage. FTP, name this economist more famous for his
Principles of Political Economy and Taxation. {Glaucoma} This disease
can be classified into two types: chronic open-angle and closed angle.
Open angel is the most common form of this disease which is caused by
an imbalance in the production and drainage of the watery fluid
produced by cells behind the lens of the eye. FTP, name this disease
of the eye which, if untreated, can lead to blindness. Thomas {Hobbes}
This man became tutor to the Cavendish family and later translated
some of Francis Bacon's work into English. In 1646, he became tutor to
the Prince of Wales who would later become Charles II. It was in
Paris, where Charles was exiled, that this man would write his most
famous work subtitled: "the Matter, Form, and Power of a Commonwealth,
Ecclesiastical and Civil". FTP, name this author of Leviathan.
{Osiris} The only complete account of his myth comes from Plutarch,
although Egyptian fragments support what Plutarch reported. Son of Geb
and Nut, he is credited with introducing agriculture to the Egyptians.
One famous story involves him being dismembered by Set, after which he
was pieced back together by his sister Isis. FTP, name this Egyptian
deity of the underworld and god of the dead. Symphony No. {7} Unlike
most early 20th Century symphonies, it is composed of a single
movement so the composer questioned whether he should call it a
symphony or not. Its composer conducted its premiere in 1924 under the
title _Fastasia Sinfonia_, but when he published it in 1925 he
restored its proper name. FTP, name this orchestral work, the last of
Finnish composer Jean Sibelius. Charles {Demuth} Born in 1883, he
befriended Marcel Duchamp in New York during World War I. A few years
later, influenced by Futurism, he developed the style of Precisionism
to depict urban and industrial architecture. The title of his most
famous painting comes from a poem by the artist's friend William
Carlos Williams whose name appears in the design in the form "Bill",
"Carlos", and "W.C.W." FTP, name this artist whose most famous work
depicts a fire truck entitled _I Saw the Figure 5 in Gold_. Nicholas
{Bourbaki} The axioms of this group are defined so as to be as broad
as possible, in contrast to the systems of axioms of Euclid, which
characterize only Euclidean geometry, and of Giuseppe Peano, which
concern the theory of natural numbers. They take their name from a
general who has a statue in Nancy, where most of them worked. However,
the name Nicholas comes from a certain saint who brings gifts to the
mathematical world. FTP, name this influential mathematical group, who
publishes their books under a pseudonym. Jan {Purkinje} His discovery
that as light intensity decreases, the sensation of red fades faster
than the blue was named after him. This is not the only thing named
after him either as he He also discovered large, many-branched nerve
cells in the cerebral cortex which bear his name. Finally, fibers in
the heart which help control heart function are named for him. FTP,
name this Czech physiologist. Treaty of {Tilsit} After defeating the
Russians at Friedland, Napoleon forced the Alexander I to sign this
treaty which forced Russia to back France against Britain if Britain
refused mediation. Later on, King Frederick William III of Prussia
took part and the puppet Kingdom of Westphalia was created. FTP, name
this treaty famous for being signed on a raft in the middle of the
Neman River, which brought an end to the War of the Third Coalition.
Dario {Fo} He and his wife, the actress Franca Rame, lead the theater
cooperative La Comune. His plays, which have been produced in over 30
countries, include Mistero Buffo, The Pope and the Witch, and most
famously, Accidental Death of an Anarchist. FTP, name this winner of
the 1997 Nobel Prize in Literature. {Peltier} effect Unlike the
Seebeck effect, which occurs in a single material in the presence of a
temperature difference without an electric current, this only occurs
at the junction of two dissimilar materials when electric current
flows. Heat, is either emitted or absorbed at the junction, depending
on the direction of current flow. {Thomson} effect In this effect, an
electric current flowing through a homogeneous material that also has
a temperature difference will cause the emission or absorption of heat
in the body of the material. The direction of the electric current
relative to the sense of the temperature difference (that is, flowing
toward higher or lower temperature) determines whether heat is emitted
or absorbed. Gaius {Marius} As a provincial Italian, a fellow-townsman
of Cicero, he was handicapped in his rise through Roman politics.
However, thanks to the military reputation he gained against Numidians
and Germans, he eventually became consul seven times. FTP, name this
conquerer of the African prince  Jugurtha, whose chief rival was
Sulla. The {Wife of Bath} Her best friend's name is Alison, which is
ironic since she is also named Alison. She is hard of hearing - a
result of being beaten by Jankyn, her fifth husband. She cheats on her
fourth husband Metellius, but, of course, gap- toothed people are
inevitably lusty. Her trade is cloth-making, and she tells the tale of
the knight who searches for "what women most want." FTP name this sole
secular female in Chaucer's Canterbury Tales. Dmitri {Shostakovich} A
work by this composer reappeared under the name of Katerina Ismailova,
who is the main character of the work. The composer had written an
opera based on a Nikolai Leskov story, whose lone connection to
Shakespeare is its heroine's propensity for murder. FTP name this
composer who later did compose incidental music for Hamlet and King
Lear, but is better known for Babi Yar and Lady Macbeth of Minsk.
{Paracelsus} Influenced by Rosicrucianism, he separated elements from
the primal matter, or Mysterium Magnum. According to him, the air was
inhabited by sylphs, the water by nymphs, the earth by gnomes, and the
fire by salamanders. Born Theophrast Bombast von Hohenheim, he flouted
the  traditional methods of Avicenna and Galen. FTP name this Swiss-
born physician, sometime charlantan, and full-time alchemist.
{Mauryan} dynasty This dynasty began with the violent overthrow of
Selecius I (Nicator) in 303 BC. Following the Nanda dynasty, its
founder was Chandragupta, who conquered the Punjab in 322 BC. FTP name
this dynasty also featuring Asoka, which ended when nomads from
Central Asia invaded and wiped out the mostly Buddhist kingdom.
{formic} acid (acc: {methanoic} acid) This common organic acid is the
most highly ionized and is particularly aggressive when hot &
anaerobic. It is soluble in water, ether, and alcohol and is an easily
oxidized reducing agent used commercially, but it is best known for
the corrosive, stinging effects found in nettles. FTP, name this acid
with formula HCOOH, also found in ant bites. The {Tale of Genji} The
last two volumes ("The Lady of the Boat" and "The Bridge of Dreams")
deal with the rivalry in love between the title character's supposed
son and grandson. First translated into English by Arthur Waley, the
title character is an illegitimate son of the emperor, living in the
eleventh century A.D. FTP name this work of the Heian period, written
by Lady Murasaki Shikibu. Walter Hermann {Nernst} In the 1920's he
invented a "Neo-Bechstein" piano which amplified sounds produced at
low amplitudes. He also developed a method for injecting nitrous oxide
into automobile cylinders to assist travel uphill. With Fritz Haber he
proposed using chemical agents as weapons during World  War I. FTP
name this scientist most famous for his statement that chemical
changes at absolute zero involve no change in entropy, or the third
law of thermodynamics. {Klein} bottle Effectively, it is a proof that
every individual geometry can be constructed projectively. Constructed
by the man who in 1895 initiated the writing of an encyclopedia of
mathematics, it is a one-sided surface which is closed and has no
boundary. FTP name this attempt to unify Euclidean and non- Euclidean
geometries, which resembles a trumpet with the mouth-piece doubled
back. The {Rights of Man} As a result of this tract, the author was
forced to flee to France and was tried in England in absentia as a
traitor. Part II is an excoriation of Edmund Burke's Appeal from the
New to the Old Whigs while Part I responds to Burke's Reflections on
the Revolution in France. FTP name this political tract which defends
a Declaration made by the French Assembly, written by Thomas Paine.
{Madonna with the Long Neck} Four onlookers huddle close together on
the left, while a small - almost imperceptible - figure unfolds a
scroll in the lower right. Painted around 1532, it was completed after
the artist had moved from Parma to Rome, but it now hangs in the
Palazzo Pitti in Florence. It is notable for its long, sinewy Christ-
child and for a certain disconcerting feature of the Virgin Mary. FTP
name this Mannerist painting by Parmagianino. {Hel} or {Hela} She has
been portrayed in various ways, but commonly she is thought to have
completely white skin on the left side and completely black skin on
the right. She rides a three-legged horse and emerges to shatter
Asgard on the day of Ragnarok with her father Loki. From the waist up,
she looks like a woman, but below, she is a skeleton. For 10 points,
identify this Norse deity, the Goddess of Death. {amicus curiae} In
the 1989 Supreme Court Case Webster v. Reproductive Health Services,
more than seventy interest groups filed briefs with the court to voice
their opinions. Such briefs filed by persons or groups who are not
directly involved in the legal action in question but wish to share
their views on the matter are known by -- for 10 points -- what two
word Latin name that literally translates as "friend of the court?"
{Ross Ice Shelf} It is bordered by its namesake sea and also by the
Siple, Gould, Shackleton and Hilary Coasts. It also surrounds
Roosevelt Island, though if the Earth continues to warm up, then
penguins will be forced to swim from Roosevelt Island to nearby
Antarctica as this geographical entity will surely melt away. FTP,
name this immense, cold structure named for an explorer. The
{Sunnites} or {Sunni} Their four sects are Hanafites, Hanbalites,
Malikites and Shaflites. They acknowledge the first four caliphs as
rightful successors of Muhammad and are named after the text that they
consider as authentic as the Koran itself. For 10 points, identify
this orthodox and conservative body of Muslims. {Sophocles} He was
only twenty-seven when his first tragedy won the playwrights' contest,
and he must have been in his late eighties when he wrote his last
surviving play. A general in the Peloponnesian War, he was the
choragos when the Athenians celebrated victory over Xerxes at Salamis.
FTP, name this playwright who added the third actor to Greek tragedy -
the author of Women of Trachis, Philoctetes and Antigone. {Khyber
Pass} Name this geographical and geological feature, 30-20-10  30:
Located approximately 34 degrees north latitude and 71 degrees east
longitude, it stands at an elevation of 1,067 meters and is just west
of the city of Peshawar.  20: It is also no more than 150 miles East
of Kabul and has within 100 miles of it the towns of Bala Bagh,
Jailalabad and Mardan.  10: This historically important traveling zone
lies on the border between Afghanistan and Pakistan. Rubicon,
Pharsalus, Pompey dies, Second Triumvirate formed, Philippi Pencil and
paper ready. For five points and an extra five for all correct, place
the following events surrounding the end of the Roman Republic in
chronological order, early to late: the Second Triumvirate is formed,
the Battle of Pharsalus, the Battle of Philippi, Caesar crosses the
Rubicon, the death of Pompey. {LE MISANTHROPE} or {THE MISANTHROPE} It
takes the form of a philosophical dialogue, including the poet
Orontes, who asks for honest criticism from the title character,
receives it, and vows revenge; Philinte, who preaches the natural
defects of man and the need for politeness; Celimene, who flirts with
her many suitors; and Alceste, who pursues Celimene and demands
complete honesty and strict morality. FTP, name this pessimistic 1666
play by Moliere. 3\. First performed in the palace of Prince von
Schwarzenberg on on April It takes the form of a philosophical
dialogue, including the poet Orontes, who asks for honest criticism
from the title character, receives it, and vows revenge; Philinte, who
preaches the natural defects of man and the need for politeness;
Celimene, who flirts with her many suitors; and Alceste, who pursues
Celimene and demands complete honesty and strict morality. FTP, name
this pessimistic 1666 play by Moliere. {cloud chamber} Its discoverer,
the Scottish physicist C.T.R. Wilson, spent 16 years working on it and
ultimately shared the 1927 Nobel Prize with Arthur Compton for his
work. Wilson began by attempting to duplicate the effects of clouds on
mountaintops, by expanding air within a container and cooling it until
it became supersaturated. Then Wilson used dust-free air, added
radiation, and over time perfected, FTP, this invention, the
development of which was crucial to nuclear physics and the study of
sub-atomic particles. {Atreus} When his brother Thyestes had an affair
with his wife Aerope, he vowed revenge. He killed Thyestes' two sons,
had them torn limb from limb and boiled, and fed them to his brother--
cursing his family for several generations, beginning with the murder
of his son by Thyestes' youngest child, Aegisthus. FTP, name this
father of Menelaus and Agamemnon and grandfather of Orestes and
Electra. James {WILKINSON} An adjutant general under Horatio Gates, he
was active in the "Conway Cabal" (an attempt to supplant George
Washington ) and was a rival of Anthony Wayne and George Rogers Clark
for American military leadership in the West. In 1787, he secretly
swore allegiance to Spain, but was nevertheless appointed commanding
general of the US army and governor of the Louisiana Territory. FTP,
name this army officer and conspirator, best known for helping Aaron
Burr in his plot against the U.S. government before betraying him as
well. {Batesian mimicry} The phenomenon was first observed in two
species of Brazilian forest butterflies in 1862, and Charles Darwin
hailed the article in which the explanation was first published (in
the Transactions of the Linnaean Society) as evidence that species
experienced evolution. A more famous example appears in the monarch
and viceroy butterflies, since birds find the former noxious and
therefore avoid the similarly colored viceroy. FTP, name this type of
mimicry, in which a harmless animal gains protection by evolving to
look like a noxious or poisonous relative. Chechnya (prompt on
Chechen-Ingush; do not accept Ingushetia) Among its most prominent
politicians is former Russian parliament speaker Ruslan Khasbulatov,
though Aslan Maskhadov is its current president and Dzhokar Dudayev
led its independence drive. Known in Russia as a center of organized
crime, it was the subject of stories of Caucasian revolt by Lermontov
and Tolstoi. FTP, name this region, whose capital is Grozny, which
fought a gruesome war of independence with Russia. Ossian (also
accept: Oisin) According to tradition, he was the son of the warrior
Finn MacCumhail and lived to be over 300 years old, during which time
he championed paganism and opposed the teachings of Saint Patrick.
Poems attributed to him were collected in Ireland and Scotland through
the 1500s, and in 1760, the 24-year-old Scotsman James Macpherson
claimed to have discovered several of this man's works, including the
epic poems Fingal and Temora. FTP, name this legendary Gael, the
center of a literary scandal surrounding Macpherson that helped
inspire ROmantic writers. the {CURZON LINE} It was first proposed by
the Allied Supreme Council as an armistice line after World War I,
extending south from Grodno just past Bialystok and through Brest-
Litovsk before following the Bug River to Sokoly and cutting across to
the Carpathian mountains. After the 1920 war between Russia and
Poland, the armistice line was ignored and the border was set farther
east, however, until the Soviets claimed all land east of the line in
1939 under the Hitler-Stalin Pact. FTP, name this line, post-war
Poland's eastern border. {LORENZ CURVE} The horizontal axis represents
the population, while the vertical axis corresponds to income; hence,
with perfect income distribution, the curve will be a 45 degree-line
and deviations from that line show the existence of poverty. FTP,
identify this economic representation for income inequality. {Higgs
Boson} The Superconducting Supercollider was designed to produce these
as-yet undiscovered particles in large numbers, and the SSC's demise
has postponed the search for them. Theorized to permeate the universe
like a sort of magnetic field, these particles are thought to interact
with different sub- atomic particles in different ways, with the
strengths of the interaction perceived by us as mass. FTP, name this
theoretical particle, named for the Scottish physicist who first
theorized its existence. John {Updike} When the Boston Globe decided
to drop the "Amazing Spiderman" comic strip, he wrote a letter to the
editor that convinced it to reverse its decision; X years before, he
began his literary career as a writer for the "About Town" section of
the New Yorker. He has published works of poetry including Stories of
the Afterlife and is a 2-time winner of the Pulitzer Prize for fiction
for his novels about Harry Angstrom. FTP, name the author of "Rabbit
at Rest." {Reflections on the Revolution in France} It took the form
of a 365-page letter "to a gentleman in Paris," and began with an
attack on the entry of the clergy into politics. It proceeded to
criticize universal male suffrage and complete political equality
(since the evils of the majority would be worse than those of a king),
to praise religion, aristocracy, and hereditary monarchy, and to hail
Louis XIV as "a mild and lawful monarch." "The age of chivalry is
gone," it concluded, and with the events in France, "the glory of
Europe is extinguished forever." FTP, name this 1790 work by Edmund
Burke. {oersted} Until 1932 it was known as the gauss, before that
became the term for the unit of mathematical induction. It is defined
as the intensity of a magnetic field in a vacuum in which a unit
magnetic pole experiences a magnetic force of one dyne in the
direction of the field. FTP, identify this CGS unit of magnetic field
strength, named for a Danish physicist. {MOGUL} or MUGHAL_ empire or
dynasty Officially, it ended only with the overthrow of Bahadur Shah
II in 1857, though the dynasty had steadily lost power to the British
for over 100 years. It began with the conquests of Kabul and Lahore in
1504 and 1507, and spread with further victories at Panipat, Khanua,
and on the Gogra by Babar, and during the eighteenth century entered
into an uneasy relationship with the British East India Company. FTP,
name this last Moslem empire of India, most famous for Shah Jahan and
his Taj Mahal. {COUNCIL OF TRENT} Pope Paul III called it in 1545
after aborted attempts to meet in Mantua and Vicenza, and Pope Pius IV
confirmed its decrees in 1564 in his _Profession of the Tridentine
Faith_. It rejected Pelangianism and defended the Sacraments, and it
addressed but did not resolve the problem of episcopal residency. For
ten points, name this Catholic council that began the Counter
Reformation and is named for the North Italian city in which it met.
{cloaca} Its name is derived from the Latin for "sewer", and it can be
found in every vertebrate but placental mammals. It is the most common
excretory organ among amphibians, birds, reptiles, and some fish, and
it is present in the platypus and the echidna. FTP, name this chamber
and outlet, into which the intestinal, urinary, and genital tracts all
open. {Gay-Lussac's law} of combining volumes When hydrogen gas and
oxygen gas combine to form water vapor, the ratio of the volumes of
these gases is always 2:1:2 (assuming that temperature and pressure
remain constant), since (according to Avogadro's Law) the number of
molecules in a given volume of gases is the same for all elements and
thus the molecules must combine in the same simple proportions. This
is an example, FTP, of what basic gas law, named for the scientist who
discovered it in 1808? The {FATALIST} (Do Not Accept: A Hero of Our
Time-- the work as a whole does not begin in a military camp) It
begins in a military camp in the Caucasus, where a Serbian army
officer with notorious bad luck challenges the odds and wins a round
of Russian roulette, despite the certainty of a colleague that he was
going to die. The story continues with the murder of the Serb by a
drunken Cossack later that night, and with the daring capture of the
Cossack by Pechorin, the story's protagonist. FTP, name this short
story my Lermontov, the final part of A Hero of Our Time. The Merry
Wives of Windsor In 1702, John Dennis wrote that this play had been
written at the request of Queen Elizabeth, who wanted to see Falstaff
in love. The plot revolves around Falstaff's financially inspired
courtship of the title characters, Mistresses Ford and Page. FTP, name
this 1601 Shakespearean drama, set in the British royal palace.
{TORII} Though it has many variations, the most frequent style
includes two vertical cylindrical posts, topped by two horizontal
beams (the top one of which is often arched.) Many are painted bright
red, and are located either at a sacred mountain or rock or in a
shrine, between the outer limits of a sacred area and the inner
sanctuary. FTP, identify this ceremonial gateway to the sacred
precincts of Japanese Shinto temples. Kosovo Most of its climate is
moderate continental, though the Beli Drim Valley in the south
experiences mediterranean weather. Much of the area is drained by the
Sitnica River, while the main cities are Mitrovica, Prizren, Pec, and
the capital, Pristina. The vast majority of the people are ethnic
Albanians, though there is a sizable Serbian minority. FTP, name this
province of Serbia, most famous for the 1389 battle at which the Turks
defeated the Serbs. Adam {KRAFT} His first known work is a triptych
representing the Passion and Resurrection of Christ, now located at
the Sebalduskirche in Nuernberg, Germany, while his final work, a
series of seven reliefs showing the stations of the cross, showed the
simplicity present in many of his reliefs. Born in the mid-fifteenth
century in Nuernberg, he became part of the school of sculpture named
for that city and is best known for the tabernacle of the Lorenzkirche
there. FTP, name this German sculptor, famous for his restraint and
simplicity. {JANSENISM} It was founded by a seventeenth-century
Dutchman born in Utrecht of Catholic parents, but was closely
influenced by the Augustinian theology of the Calvinists; it attacked
free will, championed predestination, and denounced moral laxity. FTP,
name this Roman Catholic religious movement that clashed with the
Jesuits, opposed the absolutism of Louis XIV (and thereby earned the
persecution of the state), and won the loyalty of Jean Racine and
Blaise Pascal. Miguel de {UNAMUNO} y Jugo He could speak 18 languages,
including both Latin and Greek, which he taught at the University of
Salamanca; he learned Danish so that he could read Kierkegaard in the
original. He wrote several short novels, including 1931's San Miguel
bueno, martir, and won acclaim for his philosophical works, including
The Tragic Sense of Life in Men and in Peoples. FTP, name this Basque-
Spanish philosopher, known for exploring the relationship between
faith and reason and the longing for immortality. Charles {LYELL} A
lawyer and the son of a naturalist, he travelled throughout Europe and
North America to make geological observations and published Principles
of Geology and Elements of Geology. His work generally won the
acceptance of uniformitarianism, and was helpful to the development of
evolutionary theory; a friend of Darwin, he eventually came to accept
natural selection tentatively. Thomas {WYATT} When Mary I decided to
wed Spains King Philip II in 1554, this Protestant led an uprising to
place Mary's half sister Elizabeth on the throne. He persuaded Mary's
army to join him and camped outside London until Mary delivered a
speech at Guildhall that inspired Londoners to form a new army that
put down his rebellion. Mackinlay {Kantor} This American author wrote
several collections of short stories ranging from life in the Ozarks
to Chicago gangsters. He also wrote historical novels, penning Spirit
Lake and Valley Forge. He was a reporter for the Webster City Daily
News, and he eventually returned to Iowa to become a columnist for the
Des Moines Tribune. He eventually became a screenwriter in Hollywood
where he adapted his work Glory for Me for the 1946 film, The Best
Years of our Lives. FTP -- name this author of 1955's Pulitzer prize
winner Andersonville. Sir {Gawain} In the 12th century Historia
Rccegum Britannia by Geoffrey of Monmouth, this man is Arthur's
ambassador to Rome. In the 12th century romances of Chretien de
Troyes, his prowess in battle was surpassed only by that of Lancelot
and Perceval. However, with the emergence of the Grail theme, he is
depicted as a treacherous knight. His strength supposedly waxed and
waned with the sun, a characteristic that links him with Gwalchmei,
the solar deity of Celtic mythology. FTP-- name this opponent of the
Green Knight. Probation Evolving from common-law procedures and
starting with the volunteer work of a Boston cobbler, John Augustus in
1841, this method of penology first became a government function in
1869 when Massachusetts passed a law requiring the Board of Charities
to send an agent to arrange family placement for young offenders.
Massachuesetts strengthened it in 1878 with a law authorizing court
employment of an officer to monitor it. FTP, give the name for a
sentence suspended on the condition that the offender behaves as
directed. {Anthropic} Principle The weak version of this principle
states that observed values are always restricted by the requirement
that they be compatible with our existence. The strong version of this
principle states further that the universe must be nearly as we know
it or else life would not exist. FTP, what is the general name of this
principle? {Smooth} muscle This type of muscle contains only 1 nucleus
per cell, and is innervated by the Autonomic Nervous system. While
they contain Actin and Myosin filaments, these filaments lack the
organization of skeletal sarcomeres, thus they are non-striated. FTP
-- name this type of muscle responsible for involuntary processes,
found in the digestive tract, bladder, and the blood vessel walls.
{Op} Art It often incorporates kinetic energy into designs of squares,
lines, circles, and dots to create illusions. Often color is used in a
powerful way to give a sense of depth to the pictures. Also common are
invisible paintings, in which shapes emerge as the viewer's eye
becomes accustomed to the colors of the canvas. FTP -- name this
1960's art movement that rejects all signs of representation and
insists on nonobjectivity. Franz {Schubert} Kept out of the military
because of poor eyesight and a height under 5 feet, he moved on to
teaching in his father's school. His last big concert, featuring late
work like Die Allmacht and Auf dem Strom was largely ignored by the
music press because of the advent of Paganini. Tutored by Salieri he
dedicated his F minor Fantasy for Piano Duet to Countess Caroline
Esterhazy. FTP, name this composer of the operas Rudiger and Der
Minnesanger, a adaptation of Goethe, Erlkonig, and the  Unfinished
Symphony. {Nova Scotia} It has a Brooklyn, Amherst, Long Island,
Annapolis, and Dartmout, but it is not a New England state. It is
divided into two main islands by the Strait of Canso and is joined to
the continent by the isthmus of Chignecto. It is bordered to the North
by three main bodies of water, the Northumberland Strait, the Gulf of
St. Lawrence, and the Bay of Fundy. FTP, name this province featuring
the Cape Breton Highlands with its capital at Halifax. {White House}
The name's the same. Located in Southwest Colorado, at 13,493 feet, it
is one of Colorado's highest peaks. It also names a canyon located in
Arizona, near the Canyon de Chelly (shay) which the Anasazi Indians
considered sacred. It is the name for the parliament building
bombarded by troops loyal to Boris Yeltsin. It is most famous, though,
as the structure, administered by the U.S. Park Service, which was
rebuilt in 1817 by James Hoban, after it was burned. FTP, give the
common name. {Midnight's Children} On August 15, 1947, two boys are
born in a Bombay hospital, where theyare switched by a nurse. Saleem
Sinai, the son of a poor Hindu woman anda British colonist, will be
raised by a prosperous Muslim couple. Shiva,who is given to a poor
Hindu man, is the actual son of the Muslim couple.Saleem represents
modern India, while Shiva becomes India's most honoredwar hero. FTP --
name this 1981 Booker Prize winner by Salman Rushdie. {1} or {one} or
{unity} In algebra it generates the additive semigroup of the non-
negative integer. In analysis it is the radius of the open disk
referred to in Schwarz's Lemma. In calculus it is the smallest value
of p for which the integral from 1 to infinity of 1/x^p ("1 over x to
the p power") diverges. FTP, name the number, the multiplicative
identity. The {Virial} Theorem In classical physics this theorem
states that one half the dot product of the force and position vectors
is equal to the average kinetic energy. In quantum mechanics it is
used to show, among other things, that the average potential energy of
a harmonic oscillator equals the average kinetic energy. FTP, name
this theorem that also exists in other forms with the prefix "hyper-".
{Of Human Bondage} This story's protagonist is very sensitive of his
handicap. While a medical student in London, he meets Mildred Rogers,
a waitress for whom he is infatuated with. He cannot leave her
although she continually scorns him. After medical school he meets
Sally Athelney, through whom he finds happiness. FTP-- name this story
dealing about the plights of the club-footed Philip Carey, the most
famous novel by Somerset Maugham. Skylab It was built from the S-IVB
stage of a Saturn V Moon Rocket, whose hydrogen tank had been
converted into a two story living accommodation, in fact its internal
volume was 11,700 cubic feet, the same size as a small house. Capable
of holding 3 people, it was launched by another Saturn V rocket. FTP,
name this object which, after completing almost 35,000 earth orbits,
disintegrated and crashed into the Indian Ocean and parts of
Australia. {Coyote} In the legend of the Tuleyone Indians, this
creature is called Olle and is the world's savior. However, in most
other mythologies it more closely parallels Blue-Jay of the Chinook,
or the Norse Loki. Popular in Navajo stories, ftp, name this cunning,
sometimes malicious animal character, probably more famous as
"Carnivorous Vulgaris." {Coriolanus} (Do not accept "Corioloso" or
"Coriolis") The beginning of this play follows Caius Marcius through
phases of his career. In peacetime, he is depicted as an arrogant
nobleman, later on he is seen as a valiant warrior against Rome's
enemies, finally he is seen as a worthy consul candidate. He refuses
to flatter the Roman citizens, thus leading to his eventual expulsion.
He joins forces with his enemy Tullis Aufidius against Rome. In the
end , he is persuaded by his mother to make peace with Rome. FTP --
name this last political tragedy of William Shakespeare. Han It saw
the readoption of Confucianism as the imperial philosophy, replacing
the Legalism of the preceding dynasty. A program of expansion under Wu
Ti led to conquests into modern day Vietnam, Korea, and Uzbekistan.
Imperial control was usurped in 7 AD by Wang Mang, but reestablished
in 25 AD and continued until 220, when the dynasty was destroyed by
the Yellow Turbans and the Five Pecks of Rice revolts. FTP, name the
Chinese dynasty, following the Qin ("chin"), which lent its name to
the predominant ethnic group in China. The {Dumb Waiter} In this two-
character play, a pair of murderers wait in a sparse basement room for
orders to their next killing. As they chat, first discussing the
trivial and gradually more pressing issues, they start  to receive
mysterious notes. Semiliterate thugs, they cannot fulfill these
requests for food, and they react to the Absurdist intrusions in kind,
Ben by scrupulously following all the rules he knows, and Gus by
questioning absurdity and authority. Drawing on "Waiting For Godot,"
but with a cold, fascist concept of God, name FTP, this Harold Pinter
play. {T}homas (or {Stonewall}) {Jackson} After completing a tour of
duty in the Army of Occupation in Mexico, he became a professor of
natural and experiential philosophy at the Virginia Military
Institute, and commanded the VMI cadets at John Brown's hanging in
Charles Town. He led a brigade into action at Falling Waters in May of
1861 and was assigned to the Army of the Shenandoah. FTP, name this
Confederate, who died a lieutenant general while commanding troops
against Joseph Hooker at Chancellorsville. Irving {Fisher} Making a
fortune from a visible card index file system, this former
mathematician was able to spend the rest of his life formulating
economic theories. He set down the equation which stated that the
stock of circulating money times the velocity of its circulation plus
the volume of deposited money times the velocity of its circulation
equaled the purchasing power of money. He wrote The Nature of Capital
and Income and The Theory of Interest. FTP, name the man who pioneered
modern investment theory and wrote the commercially successful, How To
Live. Joseph R. {McCarthy} Early in 1950, the Washington D.C. press
corps had voted him the worst member of the Senate. Then Father Edmund
A Walsh suggested that he take up a controversial issue pertaining to
the federal bureaucracy. FTP, name the man who then rocketed to infamy
when he declared that he had the names of 205 known communists.
{Hrotsvitha} (Ros-VEE-tha) or {Hroswitha} or {Hrotsvit} This 10th
century nun at the German monastery of Gandersheim is one of the first
medieval dramatists who historians know by name. It is not known
whether Gandersheim's nuns ever performed her six plays, which draw
heavily on the writing of the Roman comedian Terence, but modern
productions show that it was possible. Many of her plays,
unsurprisingly involve women in leading roles, like the three virgins
in Dulcitius (dool-SEE-shuhs). FTP, name this nun, whose Paphnutius
inspired Anatole France's novel and, indirectly, Massenet's opera. the
{Ciompi} Rebellion Many historians consider this rebellion to be one
of the first proto- industrial revolts. During the summer of 1378, a
group of disenfranchised Florentine nobles, members of the Parte
Guelpha (PAR-tay GWEL-fa), joined forces with minor guildsmen and day
laborers of the wool industry in order to take more representation in
the guild-run government. However, evidence shows that the day
laborers had banded together in a festive group much earlier, in the
1330's. FTP, name the revolt, the name as the group of day laborers,
whose flag was originally given to them by Walter of Brienne. {Biafra}
or {Biafra Crisis } (on an early buzz) In 1966, after an attempted
coup and the murder of the centralgovernment's Prime Minister, 30,000
tribal inhabitants of this state were massacred, andanother million
fled to the east. In January 1967, the leader of theEastern region,
Colonel Ojukwu, met with other regional premiers in Ghana,but a
collapse in the talks led Ojukwu to declare his region'sindependence.
FTP, name this short-lived African state, whose breakawayfrom Nigeria
led to 3 years of civil war, and the death of up to a millionpeople
from combat, starvation, and disease. {Echinoderms} or {Echinodermata}
This phylum is so diverse that there is no physical
characteristicshared by all members, though most of them possess a
radial symmetry andan exoskeleton made up of several plates or
ossicles. Members using awater vascular system for locomotion and
food-gathering include seacucumbers, sea lillies, and starfish. FTP,
name this phylum literallymeaning "spiny-skinned." Washington Irving
15: The favorite and last of 11 children, his series of satirical
essays appeared during 1802-3 with the signature of Jonathan Oldstyle,
Gent., in the Morning Chronicle.  5: This writer called 'the first
American man of letters', is known for such works as The Adventures of
Captain Bonneville, Astoria, and Rip Van Winkle. Macbeth He was
defeated and killed at Lumphanan in 1057, after an invasion from
England made possible by the assistance of Earl Siward of Northumbria.
Probably the grandson of Kenneth II, he took power after killing the
king in 1040, and defeated a revolt led by Crinan, the father of his
predecessor. FTP, identify this king of the Scots, who was killed by
Malcolm Canmore, the son of the king he had killed, Duncan I. the
{Triassic} period It was named in 1834 by von Alberti after the
sequence of strata that he studied in Bunter, Muschelkalk, and Keuper.
Rocks from this period are often difficult to distinguish from the
Permian strate, and the term ÒNew Red SandstoneÓ is often applied to
rocks of both periods indiscriminately. FTP, identify this period,
which began 225 million years ago and ended 190 million years ago, the
first period of the Mesozoic era which was followed by the Jurassic.
The {Mill on the Floss} After the death of her father, the protagonist
of this novel goes to St. OggÕs to stay with her cousin Lucy, who is
engaged to Stephen Guest. After Stephen acts inappropriately on a
boating trip, she is ostracized, and only Lucy, Dr. Kenn, and Philip
Wakem, the deformed son of the town lawyer, will see her. FTP,
identify this novel, first published in 1860, which tells the story of
the children of the miller of Dorlcote, Tom and Maggie Tulliver, and
which was written by George Eliot. Protagoras He was a friend of
Pericles, and was invited by him to write a legal code for the new
colony of Thurii. All we have of his writings is the first sentence of
his _On the Gods_, and most of what we know of his comes from Platonic
dialogues, especially the one named for him. FTP, name this Sophist
from Abdera, who is best known for his statement that ÒMan is the
measure of all things.Ó Osceola He was tricked by General Thomas
Jesup, who convinced him to come out of hiding by offering to
negotiate for peace. Captured in 1837, he died the next year in a
South Carolina prison. FTP, name this Native American leader, who
fought from the Everglades after the Government tried to make the
Seminoles move West. Eudora {Welty} Her third short story collection,
_The Golden Apples_, is set in the fictional town of Morgana. Her
first collection, _A Curtain of Green_, appeared in 1941 with an
introduction by Katherine Ann Porter. FTP, name this author of _The
Wide Net_ and _The Bride of the Innisfallen_, who is best known for
_Delta Wedding_ and _The OptimistÕs Daughter_. Jean Baptiste {Joseph}
or Baron {Fourier} He resigned his post as prefect of Grenoble during
NapoleonÕs Hundred Days campaign, and died in 1830 of a disease he
picked up in Egypt. The son of a tailor, he narrowly escaped the
guillotine during the Revolution, and went on to achieve scientific
fame for his statement of a law which states that the heat flux
through a uniform solid is given by the product of thermal
conductivity and the temperature gradient. FTP, name this
mathematician, who showed that any arbitrarily repeating function may
be represented by the type of series named for him. {Herod} Antipas In
39 A.D. he went to Rome in hope of persuading Caligula to name his
king, but failed and was banished to Lugdunum, where he died. When his
father died in 4 B.C., he became tetrarch of Peraea and Galilee, and
divorced his first wife to marry the wife of his half-brother Philip.
FTP, name this ruler of Palestine, the husband of Herodias who ordered
the death of John the Baptist. The {Seagull} The play ends with Eugene
Dorn pulling Boris aside and telling him to get Irina out of the room,
because her son has just committed suicide. A subplot involves Masha,
the daughter of SorinÕs estate manager, who marries Medvedenko even
though she is in love with Constantine Treplev. FTP, identify this
1896 play, subtitled ÒA Comedy in Four Acts,Ó in which Nina Zarechnaya
compares herself to the titular bird, and which was written by Anton
Chekhov. Gustav {Holst} After the First World War, he wrote solemn
choral works like _The Hymn to Jesus_ and _Ode to Death_, but then
turned to comic opera with _The Perfect Fool and _At the BoarÕs Head_.
His interest in Hindu literature is reflected in his opera _Sida_ and
his _Hymns from the Rig-Veda_, while his reading of _The Return of the
Native_ inspired him to write the orchestral work _Egdon Heath_. FTP,
name this English composer, best known for his _Saint PaulÕs Suite_
and the seven-movement suite he wrote during World War I, _The
Planets_. the {Buddha} or Gautama {Siddhartha} He was born the son of
the rajah of the Sakya tribe which ruled in Kapilavastu. He died at
the age of 80 in Kusinagara. In between, he left his fatherÕs court at
the age of 30, and spent six years as an ascetic before settling down
beneath a banyan tree in Bihar. FTP, name this religious figure, who
taught that life is suffering and that the chief good is non-
existence, or Nirvana. The {Dunciad} Book II features a burlesque of
the funeral games in the _Aeneid_. In Book I, Bayes is made king in
place of the deceased Eusden. The original protagonist was based on
Lewis Theobald, who had criticized the authorÕs edition of
Shakespeare, but the final version is based on Colley Cibber. FTP,
identify this satirical poem in four books, first published
anonymously in 1728, a work by Alexander Pope in which Dullness
triumphs at the end. Madagascar Its northernmost and southernmost
points are the Cap DÕAmbre (duh-AHM- brey) and the Cap Sainte-Marie.
The cities of Vangaindrano and Taliara are located near the Tropic of
Capricorn, while larger cities include Mahajanga and Antsiranana. FTP,
identify this island nation, which is surrounded by the Indian Ocean
and the Mozambique Channel, and whose capital is at Antananarivo. John
William {Strutt} or Baron {Rayleigh} In 1873, he inherited his
fatherÕs title, but continued to work in his laboratory at the family
estate, Terling Place. BalfourÕs brother-in-law, he succeeded Maxwell
in Cambridge, and his classic book on _The Theory of Sound_ was
written while he was living on a houseboat on the Nile. FTP, name this
British physicist, who won the Nobel Prize for his work on gas
densities and argon, best remembered for his attempts to solve the
black body problem, which culminated in an equation which was
superseded by PlanckÕs quantum theory, a formula which is named for
him and Jeans. Sir Francis {Drake} In 1567, he commanded the Judith on
John HawkinsÕs expedition to the Gulf of Mexico. Five years later, he
set out with the Pasha and the Swan to plunder Panama, and became the
first Englishman to see the Pacific Ocean. FTP, name this privateer,
who served as a vice admiral to help repel the Spanish Armada, but who
is best known as the commander of the Golden Hind who, in 1580, became
the first Englishman to circumnavigate the globe. the {suitors of
Penelope} (accept equivalents) They include Leodes, who is gifted with
prophetic powers, and Ctesippus (ktee-SI-pus), who is killed by
Philoetius. They are led by Eurymachus (yoo- ri-ma-kus) and Antinous
(an-TI-no-us), the first to be shot down. FTP, identify this group of
100 freeloaders, who were all slain by Philoetius, Eumaeus,
Telemachus, and Odysseus in Book 22 of the _Odyssey_. Edgar Lawrence
{Doctorow} From 1960 to 1964 he worked as editor of the New American
Library, a period during which he wrote his first novel, _Welcome to
Hard Times_. His later books include _Big as Life_, _Loon Lake_, and
_The Book of Daniel_, which is based on the Rosenberg affair. FTP,
name this novelist, whose best known works include _WorldÕs Fair_,
_Billy Bathgate_, and _Ragtime_. Anton von {Webern} Although he
conducted the Vienna WorkersÕ Symphony Orchestra and founded a choir
called the Kunstelle, he spent most of his life living in retirement
at Modling. After his music was banned by the Nazis, he worked as a
proofreader during World War II, and he was accidentally shot by an
American soldier at the end of the war. FTP, name this composer of
_Five Pieces for Orchestra_ and _Four Pieces for Violin and Piano_,
one of SchoenbergÕs first disciples. Alberta Features in the north of
this province include the Wood Buffalo National Park and the Caribou
Mountains. Cities include Red Deer, Peace River, and Medicine Hat.
FTP, name this Canadian province, which lies between British Columbia,
the Northwest Territories, Saskatchewan, and Montana, and whose
capital is Calgary. Theodore {Gericault  } In 1822, he painted a
series of portraits of the inmates of a Paris asylum, of which only
five survive. During the Hundred Days, he was so disgusted with the
pro-Napoleonic reaction that he joined the Musketeers and accompanied
Louis XVIII to the Belgian border. FTP, name this French artist, who
is best known today for his lithographs of horses and for his 1819
masterpiece _The Raft of the Medusa_. The {Human Comedy} (Le ComŽdie
humaine) Its author specified three categories of novels which it
included: Analytic Studies, Philosophical Studies, and Studies of
Manners; and set them in six scenes: private, provincial, country,
military, political, and Parisian life. The Wild Ass's Skin, The
Country Doctor, A Harlot High and Low, Eugenie Grandet, and Cousin
Bette are among the about 90 novels of which it consists. FTP, what is
this series of books, intended to comprehend the whole of contemporary
society, by HonorŽ de Balzac. {feathers} They consist of two principal
parts: the axis, or spinelike central structure; and the barb, or side
branch of the stem. All the barbs together form the vane or fringe.
The axis consists of the barb-bearing shaft and the hollow quill,
which is rooted in a small sac of the skin. They are similar in
structure and origin to the scales of fish and reptiles. FTP, name
these objects, which serve as sex differentiators, protect from water
and cold, and aid the flight of birds. {H}uman {G}enome {P}roject
Although it first acquired government funding in the form of a NIH
grant in 1990, it had begun under private auspices several years
before. The majority of its findings are mere junk, yet its
comparatively few useful successes still manage to cause quite a stir.
Although it has enjoyed some notable successes in the treatments of
diseases, its primary purpose is as a research endeavor. FTP, name
this effort which has racked up a $3 billion bill in its half-decade
of delving into the nature of DNA and the causes of hereditary
diseases. {fuck} Its first known written occurrence is in an English
poem called “Fleas, Flies, and Friars,” composed before 1500, which
satirizes the Carmelite monks of Cambridge. The word itself is in a
simple code, showing its shock value even then. The line that contains
it says of the friars, “They are not in heaven because they BLANK
wives of Ely.” FTP, name this infamous obscenity, meaning "to have
sexual intercourse with." {James II} He was born in London in 1633 and
given the title of the Duke of Albany a year later. In 1657, he joined
the Spanish service in war against England. Three years later, he was
made high admiral of the English navy, but resigned in another three
years upon the Parliamentary passage of the Test Act. Immediately
after his resignation, he married the Catholic Mary Beatrice of
Modena. Upon his ascension to the throne, he embarked upon a series of
trials known as the Bloody Assizes. FTP, name this English king who
succeeded his brother Charles and was overthrown in 1688 by the
Protestant William of Orange. {Sudan} This African nation is the home
to Dinder National Park and the Teiga Plateau. The Jabal Marrah
Mountains hold the peak of the same name, the tallest in this nation.
The Jibal An Nubah Terrace, the As Sudd flats, the Red Sea Hills, and
the Nubian desert all stand out as geographic features of this nation.
FTP, name this large African nation more noteworthy for containing the
second, third, fourth, fifth, and sixth cataracts of the Nile River.
{hand} It can be black or invisible, depending upon your political or
philosophical inclinations. It can be a type of tool or the basis for
a variety of communication. If it is “Learned” it can be a prominent
American jurist, but it only really appears in primates. FTP, identify
this anatomical feature of twenty-seven bones subdivided into carpals,
metacarpals, and phalanges. {holography} (accept: {hologram}s) The
theoretical principles for this technology were laid out in 1947, but
no working prototype was tested until 1960 because critical technology
did not yet exist. Because of a property often exploited in such
consumer products as baseball cards, this technology has the potential
for use in extremely high capacity digital storage. Scientifically,
this technology has made the use of inferometers far more precise.
FTP, name this laser-dependant invention for which Dennis Gabor won
the 1971 Nobel Prize in Physics. {Cather} , Willa Sibert She gained
her college degree from the University of Nebraska but soon after
moved to New York City to take the editor’s position at McClure’s
magazine. Several trips to the Southwest provided fodder for such
tales as the short story “The Enchanted Bluff” and the novels “The
Song of the Lark” and “The Professor’s House.” Although her
Southwestern experiences were an important foray into regionalism, she
is more famous for her regionalist fiction describing the Midwestern
pioneer experience. FTP, identify the author of the novels “One of
Ours,” “Lost Lady,” and “O Pioneers!” {subway} The first began
operation in 1863 in London under steam power. In three years, it was
significantly expanded and converted to electricity, but during that
time Budapest became the first European city to possess a fully
electric system. The first opened in the United States in Boston in
1897, and it was followed in seven years by New York’s nine-mile
system. Since then, the fledgling system has expanded to several
hundred miles and is the largest in the world. FTP, identify this
underground transportation innovation which shares the name of a
nationwide hoagie chain. {maltose} This common sugar is dextrorotary Ð
that is, it rotates a plane of polarized light to the right. Formed by
the action of the enzyme diastase on starch, this substance is water-
soluble and crystallizes in fine needles. It hydrolyzes into glucose Ð
a process whose ease accounts for the sugar’s easy digestion. FTP,
name the sugar whose digestibility is exploited by such products as
infant food, beer, and milkshakes. {Shinto} Its early period saw this
religion without a fixed dogma, sacred writings, moral precepts, or
even a name. Practitioners merely professed faith in and worshipped a
vast pantheon of divinities known as “kami” that personified aspects
of the natural world. As time passed, the rites of thanksgiving,
purification, and offerings to ancestors became written down and
codified. As centuries passed, it split into two distinct variations Ð
State and Secular. FTP, identify the official religion of Japan until
the end of World War Two. {prion} Found in the brains of sheep that
had died of scrapie, this tiny particle has become the focus of much
speculation as the potential contagion in this summer’s British bovine
spongiform encephalopathy. Their discoverer, American neurologist
Stanley B. Prusiner, has speculated that they have a pivotal role in
the formation of the plaque characteristic of such degenerative brain
diseases as scrapie. FTP, name this minute particle consisting solely
of protein. {Ephesus} (accept: {Arsinoe}) Founded in the eleventh
century by Ionian Greeks, this Aetolian city had a long and gloried
past of losing in conflicts. The hometown of Heraclitus, it was the
endpoint of the Roman Arcadian Way, but it is more famous for its role
as a religious center. It held the third general council of the
Christian Church, notable for its condemnation of the Nestorian
heresy. FTP, identify this city most well know as the site of one of
the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, the grand temple to Artemis.
battle of {Jutland} In 55 minutes of heavy fighting, the British Navy
was able to trap enemy ships in a “V”-shaped pinscher between Admiral
John Jellicoe and Vice Admiral David Beatty. The British forces under
Jellicoe lost nearly six times the number of men and four more ships
as their opponents, but succeeded in securing victory nonetheless. The
Allied success at this battle convinced German military commanders of
the impenetrability of the Allied blockade of the North Sea. FTP,
identify this 1916 naval battle off the coast of Denmark. {3M}
({Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing}) Founded in Two Harbors,
Minnesota in 1902, it quickly burgeoned into a national business
force. It did not turn a profit until 1916, but it learned well from
its initial losses. During the Great Depression, it tripled in size Ð
an occurrence not matched by any other major corporations. During the
Depression, it also acquired its labor-friendly reputation when it
became the first major U.S. company to offer its workers a pension
plan. FTP, identify this St. Paul-based corporation notable for the
products it has introduced such as waterproof sandpaper, masking tape,
videotape, Scotch tape, and the Post-It note. {Wilderness Road} This
American landmark began its existence as nearly three hundred miles of
buffalo trails and Native American paths. Initially explored in 1750
by Thomas Walker, Daniel Boone was the first pioneer to traverse its
full length. In 1780, Boone and thirty axemen were employed by the
Transylvania Company to cut the first few miles of what would become a
Midwestern icon. FTP, identify this trail, also known as Boone’s
trace, the route of passage for some 200,000 settlers in Tennessee and
Kentucky. {helot} Legends concerning their origin are many, but the
most likely explanation for their existence is that they were an
indigenous populace conquered and enslaved by later arrivals to the
area. Slaves captured in times of war provided new blood, which kept
their genetic pool relatively diverse. No matter how they arrived,
they occupied the lowest rung of the social totem pole. FTP, identify
the serfs who were the lowest class in the Spartan polis. {anarchism}
This school of though is generally considered to have been founded by
the nineteenth century French philosopher Pierre Joseph Proudhon. The
philosophic branch is more concerned with individual liberties, but
Mikhail Bakunin led the more radical, political branch that stormed
out of the First International. Often linked to syndicalism, this
movement’s most prominent American proponents were Alexander Berkman
and Emma Goldman. FTP, identify the political movement which advocated
the deconstruction of all governmental structure. {lava lamp} They
were inspired by the creation of a man known only as Mr. Dunnett, but
Englishman Edward Craven Walker spent fifteen years perfecting and
marketing this contraption. Initially a flop, it was regarded by
merchants as ugly and disgusting. Consumers did not agree, and over
eight million were sold in the next decade. FTP, name this psychedelic
fad composed of two “secret formulas” and mesmerizing enough to be
considered in some corners a replacement for drugs. {Goethe} , Johann
Wolfgang von This famous German lived in Weimar and was an avid
scientist, studying, among other topics, plant biology and optics.
This novelist, playwright, and poet began his writing career stressing
the emotional states of his protagonists in such plays as “Gotz Von
Berlichingen” and “Stella.” A trip to Italy shifted his artistic
outlook toward the restraint that he saw in classical Italian art,
resulting in such plays as “Torquanto Tasso” and “Iphigenia at Aulis.”
Towards the end of his life, the trend reversed itself somewhat when
he published the more romantic works “The West-Eastern Divan” and the
epic “Reineke Fuchs.” FTP, identify the man most famous for his poem
“Prometheus”, the short story “The Sorrows of Young Werther,” and the
play “Faust.” {Leibnitz} , Baron Gottfried Wihelm von He fixed upon
the Stoic idea that the results of all actions, no matter what they
appear to do, are for the good. Amplifying this philosophical starting
point, he expanded the idea to encompass a thoroughly predetermined
universe. He explained this divine order of the universe in the book
he completed only two years before his death. The book’s title,
“Monadologie,” gave its name to the philosophical concept he is most
famous for. FTP, identify the man perhaps better known for his
contributions to integral calculus and as the butt of a famous parody
by Voltaire. {Magritte} , Rene Francois Ghislain The contradiction
between the sedate middle class life that he lived and the art that he
produced was most notable in his attire. Never seen in public without
his small black bowler hat, this painter used the very same accessory
to portray the mundane life of the European middle classes. Born in
Lessines in 1881, this painter is famous for pioneering the artistic
style known as “magic realism” later adopted by George Grosz, but is
more widely known as a surrealist. FTP, name the artist of “Son of
Man”, “The Fall”, and “Madame Recamier de David” known to some quiz-
bowlers only as “that Belgian surrealist.” {MacDonald} Identify the
common surname: Frank and his sister Margaret were prominent poster
painters of the Art Nouveau movement; Jock was among the first of the
Canadian abstract artists; James Edward was an English-Canadian
Impressionistic landscapist; James Ramsay was England’s first Labour
Prime Minister; and Sir John Alexander was the first Canadian Prime
Minister. FTP, identify this common Scottish last name of fast food’s
“Ronald”. {Hashimoto} Ryutaro He is the current prime minister of
Japan, a position that is a natural step up from his prominent role at
his previous post as head of the Ministry of International Trade and
Industry. His two-year standoff with American trade officials gained
him national attention that he parlayed into a joint government
consisting of the Liberal Democratic Party and the Social Democratic
Party. {Copts} For ten points, this Christian group adheres to the
Monophysite doctrine. Although this religious sect has branches in
many Eastern nations, it holds the majority of its membership around
the south and east coasts of the Mediterranean Sea, particularly in
the nation with which it is most closely associated. St. {Helena}
Identify the following saints of the early church for ten points
apiece.  1: She was married to the Roman emperor Constantius I, and
was the mother of Constantine the Great, emperor of Rome. She founded
the Church of the Holy Sepulchre and the Church of the Nativity in
Jerusalem and was purported to have discovered the cross upon which
Jesus was crucified. {Cable} , George Washington For fifteen points,
his tales of the Louisiana bayou made him an exceptional practitioner
of the “local color” style of writing. In such books as “Old Creole
Days” and “The Silent South,” he not only provided an accurate
description of Louisiana life but also called for action against the
horrors of slavery. {Riis} , Jacob For ten, he is noted for his
autobiographical “The Making of an American,” but is better known as
the photographic and journalistic chronicler of the misery of the
American immigrant. This was the theme of his most enduring book, “How
the Other Half Lives,” which spurred immediate reforms in New York
state. {Grand} Canal (China) Canals have long been an important means
of transportation and commerce. Identify the following prominent
canals for ten points apiece.  1: At 1782 km in length, it connected
Beijing and Hangzhou. Begun in the 5th century BC, it is still in use
today. The oldest sections connected the Yellow and Chang Jiang
rivers, while additions in the 13th century AD added a connection to
Beijing. {Hardy} , Thomas Identify the English author on a 30-20-10
basis.  30: Born in Dorsetshire in 1840, his father was a stonemason
who specialized in rebuilding decaying churches. Initially a poet, he
turned to writing novels to provide a steady source of income for his
first wife, Emma Gifford.  20: His lesser known works include “The
Woodlanders,” “Life’s Little Ironies,” and “Wessex Tales.” His first
novel to be published was the 1871 “Desperate Remedies.”  10: He
abandoned the novel at the apogee of his career because of pressure
from censors, turning back to poetry in such collections as “Wessex
Poems,” “Moments of Vision,” and “Winter Words.” {Hofmannsthal} , Hugo
von For ten points, this poet and playwright was actually born in
Austria, but is best known for his association with the literary
branch of the Impressionistic movement that he cultivated after moving
to Germany. His most notable literary efforts include a modernization
of the morality play “Everyman,” “The Small-World Theater,” and
several operatic collaborations with Richard Strauss. {Hebbel} ,
(Christian) Friedrich For fifteen points, this dramatist was born the
son of a stonemason. He used a brutally realistic style to portray the
Biblical murderess in his play Judith, middle-class problems in “Maria
Magdalena,” and the Judean king in “Herod and Mariamne.” He is perhaps
best known for his ambitious trilogy based on the “Nibelungenlied.”
{Bonheur} , Rosa This painter applied the Barbizon emphasis upon the
land to her love of animals. In such works as “Plowing in the
Nivernais”, her animal portraits blended the classicism demanded by
the Academy into the Barbizon aesthetic. Her works were held in such
high favor and were so often commissioned by the government that she
became the first female member of the Legion of Honor. {Haber} , Fritz
Identify the famous industrial inventors for ten points apiece. Each
has made a significant contribution to the production of basic
materials needed for the modern industrial society.  1: This German
chemist won the 1918 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his discovery of a
cheap method of direct synthesis of ammonia. This process now shares
its name with the first man to take commercial advantage of it, the
German Karl Bosch. {carving} Answer the following questions about the
art of sculpting. Each question describes a method of sculpting, and
you must identify it for 10 points apiece.  1: This ancient technique
involves painstakingly cutting unwanted portions of a larger block of
material. Statues such as Michelangelo’s “David” were sculpted in this
manner. {casting} This method is an effective way to create a
permanent replica of a molding. It involves either using wax (cire
perdue) or liquefied sand to surround and repeat the features of the
original molding, known as the negative replica. Molten metal is
poured into this template to create a positive replica. {Beethoven} ,
Ludwig von Identify the following composer on a 30-20-10 basis:  30:
Some of his orchestral compositions include “Overture to Coriolanus,”
“Overture to the Consecration of the House,” and “Overture to Kšnig
Stephan.”  20: More famous orchestral compositions include his
“Overture to Leonora” and his “Overture to Egmont,” based upon a
Goethe drama of the same name in which an embattled hero fights
against the tyranny all around him. One of his most prominent ballets
is “The Creatures of Prometheus.”  10: He wrote the Piano Concerto
No.5 known as the “Emperor” and the piano classic “Fur Elise.” Pedro
{Calderon} de la Barca Orphaned as an adolescent, he wrote his first
book while still a lad, and was sixteen years old when Cervantes and
Shakespeare died. He resembled the gaunt, ascetic figures of El
Greco's canvases, and between 1615 and 1619 attended the famous Golden
Century universities of Alcala de Henares and Salamanca. He wrote his
first major play in 1623, titled "Love, Honor, and Power", and is
considered the last major figure of the "Golden Age." Identify this
17th century Spanish dramatist, FTP, famous for his metaphysical drama
set in Poland titled "Life is a Dream." {Venus of Urbino} At her feet
is a pendant figure--in this case, a slumbering lapdog. Behind her, a
simple drape serves both to place her figure emphatically in the
foreground and to press a vista into the background at the right half
of the picture. In the vista, two servants bend over a chest. Deriving
its title from the Duke who purchased it, FTP, identify this
influential painting of a reclining female nude completed in 1538 by
Titian. James {Forrestal} He was a naval aviator in World War I and
afterwards began a career as an investment banker. In June, 1940, he
was appointed as an administrative assistant to President Roosevelt,
and two months later became Under Secretary of the Navy. Four years
later he succeeded Frank Knox to become Secretary of the Navy. FTP,
identify this Cabinet official, who, with the reorganization of the
War and Navy departments, became the first Secretary of Defense in
1947 and, after a long illness, committed suicide two years later. the
{wild boy of Aveyron}, also accept {Victor} Dramatized in books by
Harlan Lane, Francois Truffaut, and Roger Shattuck's "The Forbidden
Experiment," from the reports of the hunters who had caught initial
glimpses of him, he was described as virtually naked, covered with
scars, dirty, and inarticulate. Apparently he had survived on a diet
of acorns and roots. He walked on all fours much of the time and
grunted like an animal. Phillipe Pinel was asked to examine him and
concluded that he was an incurable idiot, while Gespard Itard made
great progress with him but was unable to teach him to talk. FTP,
identify the name associated with the twelve-year-old boy who emerged
from the woods in southern France on January 9, 1800 after growing up
in isolation. {Dilation and Curettage}  Prompt: {D and C} prior to
"abbreviated" This procedure sees use in determining the causes of
menstrual disorders, as well as detecting uterine cancer. In it, an
instrument is inserted through the cervix, and the inner wall of the
uterus is scraped. The abraded cells are then removed and cultures
grown in a laboratory for examination. FTP, name this procedure,
abbreviated "D and C" and named for the actions performed.
{Phlogiston} This substance was postulated in the late 17th century by
chemists Johann Becher and Georg Stahl. It was assumed to have a
negative weight, making items which contained it lighter than those
without. It was finally debunked by Antoine Lavoisier, whose work with
oxygen proved that it combined with a substance upon combustion,
rather than this substance being eliminated. FTP, name this
hypothetical element, named from the Greek for "flammable." {A Passage
to India} First published in 1924, this novel can basically be read on
two levels: mystic and polical. Mystically it is concerned with the
search for the infinite and eternal so characteristic of Oriental
religion, and with the illogical and inexplicable in human life. The
visit to the Marabar Caves illustrates the malignant side of the
mysticism, the Temple-Festival at the close, its benignity.
Politically it deals with the tensions between the British and the
native Indians, as well as with the tension between Hindus and
Muslims. FTP, divided into three sections which correspond to the
three seasons of the Indian year: the Cold Weather, the Hot Weather,
and the Rains, identify this E. M. Forster work. Ralph {Vaughan
Williams} He studied with Parry, Wood, and Stanford at the Royal
College of Music and Cambridge, then had further lessons with Max
Bruch in Berlin and Ravel in Paris. His style was tonal and often
evocative of the English countryside through the use of folk themes,
as in "Norfolk Rhapsodies." Among his symphonies are "Symphonia
Antarctica," "A London Symphony,"and "Pastoral Symphony." Indentify
this composer, FTP, famous for such works as the opera "Sir John in
Love," featuring the Elizabethan song "Greensleeves" and "Fantasia on
a Theme by Thomas Tallis." {The Golden Bough} Written in 1890, this
anthropological work exerted considerable influence on writers such as
T.S. Eliot and D.H. Lawrence, but by the standards of modern
anthropology, many of its methods and findings are unsound. It was a
pioneer comparative study in folklore, magic, and religion that showed
parallel beliefs in primitive and Christian cultures. Identify this
influential work, FTP, authored by the Scottish anthropologist James
George Frazer. {Commensalism} prompt: {Symbiosis} An example of this
phenomenon is the pairing of the polyp and the hermit crab, found in
deep water off the coast of Newfoundland: the polyp attaches itself to
the crab's shell, eventually budding to cover the entire cell, which
it then dissolves. The colony grows at the same rate as the  crab,
providing continuous protection, while the crab provides the polyp
with a much greater food supply by its motion. FTP, name this category
of symbiosis in which the individual participants have grown so close
that they are unable to separate, but do no harm to each other. Hyman
{Rickover} His naval career was marked by a certain amount of
controversy because of his outspoken opinions and unorthodox methods.
In World War II he served as head of the electrical section of the
navy's Bureau of Ships. After the war he was assinged to the atomic
submarine project at Oak Ridge, Tennessee, and helped convince the
navy that nuclear sea power was feasible. FTP, identify this admiral
who directed the planning and construction of the world's first
atomic-powered submarine, the Nautilus. {Ionization Chamber} In this
apparatus, an enclosure is filled with a low pressure gaseous mixture,
and a set of electrodes at different electrical potentials. When a
particle or radiation enters the chamber, the gaseous sample is
ionized, creating a pathway for electrical current. This current is
then amplified and measured, proving the entrance of radiation. FTP,
name this type of device, of which the Geiger-Muller counter is a
specific example. {Isabella II} She was the daughter of Ferdinand VII
and Maria Christina, and her uncle contested her succession under the
Salic Law, thus beginning the Carlist Wars. Frequent rebellions during
her reign culminated in 1868 in the insurrection led by Serrano and
Juan Prim, and she was deposed, spending the rest of her life in
France. FTP, identify this Spanish queen, whose character made a brief
appearance in the recent film _Amistad_. {El Salvador} Two volcanic
ridges, running roughly west to east, segment the country, but in
between are broad, fertile valleys, such as that of the Lampa, the
principal river. Among the ports are La Union, Acajutla, and La
Libertad, and among the inland cities are San Miguel and Santa Ana.
FTP, identify this nation, the only Central American nation to have a
Pacific coast but not a Caribbean one. {Julien} Sorel or {Sorel} The
son of a sawyer, he pretended to be deeply religious and was named
tutor to the children of Monsieur de Renal, the mayor of Verrieres. He
falls in love with Renal's wife, and Renal sends him to the seminary
to get rid of him. Later, after Madame de Renal has ruined his
reputation in Paris, he returns to Verrieres where he shoots, but only
wounds, Madame de Renal, a crime for which he is executed. FTP,
identify this main character of Stendhal's _The Red and the Black_.
Ngo Dinh {Diem} He repeatedly refused high office with the government
of Bao Dai until 1954, when he became prime minister. He originally
had the backing of the United States, but his favoritism toward his
family and toward Roman Catholics over Buddhists caused substantial
criticism by the early 1960s. FTP, identify this South Vietnamese
leader, murdered in a coup in 1963 with the apparent backing of the
CIA. Dominique Francois Jean {Arago} Born in Estagel, this French
astronomer and physicist was educated at the Ecole Polytechnique in
Paris, where he was later appointed professor of analytical geometry
and geodesy. At the age of 23, he was also elected to the Paris
Academy of Sciences. He studied astronomy, light polarization and
magnetism, discovering the phenomenon of the production of magnetism
by rotation. FTP, name this Frenchman, born in 1786, who proved the
relationship between the Aurora and variations in the Earth's magnetic
field. {Hunger} Principal characters in this this 1890 novel include
two women that take the narrator for a madman because he tells the
younger one that she is losing her book, when the fact of the matter
is that she carries no book with her. Later, the younger woman (now
The Lady in Black) befriends the narrator because she is an
adventuresome girl who is intrigued with the idea of odd experiences,
including those that madmen might provide for her. Identify this
novel, set in Christiania, in which, FTP, a young man down on his luck
tries to write articles and plays but is paid so little for his work
that he is constantly in a feverish state of mind due to lack of food.
{Jupiter} Originally a sky deity associated with rain and agriculture,
he developed into the great father god, prime portector of the state,
concerned with all aspects of life. At his temple on the Capitol,
triumphant generals honored him with their spoils and magistrates paid
homage to him with sacrifices. FTP, identify this Roman god, the son
of Saturn and Ops and the brother and husband of Juno. {Meat Loaf}
Accept: Marvin Lee {Aday} before "born" Some actors try to sing, and
some singers try to act, but this singer has definitely earned his
acting chops. His first role was in the musical "Hair," where he was
cast as Ulysses S. Grant. He has also been cast in Broadway and Off-
broadway musicals, as well as in Shakespeare's Othello. On the
recording side, his family lent a lot of influence to his decision,
being a large gospel-singing family from Dallas, TX. His pop singing
career was given a great boost by a collaboration with an acting
buddy, Jim Steinman, and rock producer Todd Rundgren. FTP, name this
actor/singer, born Marvin Lee Aday. {Thyestes} The subject of this
drama, first presented circa A.D. 60, derives from Greek legend, and
it has autobiographical parallels with its Roman author. In it, the
title character, the brother of the rightful ruler of Argos, seduces
and carries away the ruler's wife and then steals a golden ram which
is the symbol of power held by the ruler of the kingdom. A civil war
ensues and the title character is defeated and banished. Identify this
work of Seneca, considered the most lurid and gruesome tragedy to
survive from antiquity, which, FTP, culminates in the title character
being invited back to Argos and being tricked into feasting on a
banquet which includes the bodies of his three sons. {Creep} For 15:
This is any slowly progressing, permanent deformation that is the
result of a steady force acting on the material. Found more often in
materials that are subjected to high temperatures, this phenomenon may
often act as a cure for itself. Examples are the gradual loosening of
bolts and the sagging of long cables. {Taffileh} For 15: Also known as
the Amidah, or "standing" prayer, or the Shemoneh Esreh, because it
originally contained eighteen benedictions, name this prayer which
today contains 13 petitions for welfare and messianic restoration and
six additional phrases, the only requirement of all worship services
in Judaism. {Barchester Towers} Set in a cathedral town in the west of
England, the novel opens with the political appointment of Dr. Proudie
as the new bishop. This event sets up the main conflict of the novel--
the traditional (represented by the High Church forces, led by
Archdeacon Grantly) versus the new (represented by the Low Church
newcomers, led by Mrs. Proudie and, initially, her protege, the
ambitious Mr. Obadiah Slope.) {Artichoke} This plant is grown wild in
southern Europe and cultivated in the United States, primarily in
California. Of the family Asteraceae, this table vegetable grows up to
one meter high, and the plant's leaves are long, and somewhat spiny.
The immature flower is harvested for eating, with the fleshy bases of
the scales and the heart of the plant being the "most desirable"
portions. {Avocado}  Accept: {Alligator Pear} This fruit of a tree
belonging to the family Lauraceae, native to tropical America, has a
consistency of firm butter, and a faint nutlike flavor. The fruit is a
thick-skinned drupe, the size of a large pear, yielding an alternative
name for the fruit. It is popular in the United States as a salad
topping, and is used throughout the tropics in soups. John Maynard
{KEYNES} He was born in Cambridge, and, appropriate, would later
attend university there. He was president of the University Union
Society at King's College, and after graduating he became a civil
servant in the India Office. An activist, he protested the Versailles
peace settlement in a 1919 book. In 1925 he opposed England's return
to the gold standard, and that same year he married a ballerina. For
ten points identify this man who asserted that the great actors in the
business cycle were business investors and government in his General
Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money. {FASHODA} The French, led
by Marchand, approached it from the west. The Ethiopans started coming
from the east, but turned back before reaching it. King Leopold wanted
his Belgians to come from the south, but they didn't make it either.
The English, under Kitchener, came from the north, and FTP, cemented
their control of East Africa with the capture of what Sudanese fort?
{REQUIEM}s  [Note: To the best of my knowledge, no other answer
applies to all the above, or even the first two. -- Samer Ismail]
"Salvator Mundi" by Herbert Howells. Psalm 130, "Out of the Deep", by
John Rutter. Psalm 121, "I Will Lift Up My Eyes", also by Herbert
Howells. The words "Hallelujah" and "La il Allah", by Delius. "In
Paradisum", by Gabriel Faure. "Wie lieb-lich sind dei-ne Woh-nun-gen",
by Johannes Brahms. "When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloom'd", by
Paul Hindemith. Wilfred Owen's "Strange Meeting", by Benjamin Britten.
All of these are non-traditional texts used in musical settings of,
FTP, what Office of the Dead? {ALKENE}s [ACC: {OLEFIN}s on early buzz]
The old name for this class of compounds comes from their tendency to
be oily liquids--though those with molar mass less than 70 tend to be
found in the gaseous state. They can be reduced by hydrogen gas over
palladium; they can be oxidized by permanganate ion, and cleaved by
ozone. Addition reactions are classified as Markovnikov or anti-
Markovnikov, and the Wittig reaction selectively converts them to
carbonyl compounds. Name this class of compounds, once called olefins,
which, FTP, contain double bonds. Federico Garcia {LORCA} His first
dramatic success was the 1927 Barcelona production of his Mariana
Pineda, with scenery provided by Salvidor Dali. A short time later,
his _Gypsy Ballads_ brought him sudden international fame. An
accomplished poet, one best knows him for his dramatic trilogy
consisting of Yerma, The House of Bernarda Alba, and Blood Wedding.
FTP, name him. {99} A result of one congressman's power trip, this new
Central Pennsylvania road has observers in an uproar. The first road
ever to have its route designation written into the law authorizing
construction, this new interstate serves only one state, and goes
through no town larger than Altoona. Additionally, it violates
interstate route-numbering conventions. FTP, what is this highest-
numbered two-digit interstate? {LOUIS THE PIOUS} He was the most
intelligent and educated of his dynasty, but the least successful.
During his ninth century reign, he supported monasticism and attempted
to form a unified Christian Empire, actions that helped lend his
nickname. unfortunately, his real began to disingtigrate, and he
lacked the skill to hold it together. FTP, name this son of
Charlemagne, whose Empire was divided at Verdun. {POMPIDOU CENTRE}
(accept "Beaubourg") Designed by Renzo Piano and Richard Rogers of
Britain, this building lies on the fringes of the historic Marais
section of Paris. Most do not know the monument for its primary
purpose as a museum and center for the visual art, maybe because its
exterior of brightly colored exterior pipes and ducts steals all the
attention. FTP name this building named after a past prime minister of
France. P.G. {WODEHOUSE} Born October 15, 1881, he has more than 90
books and 20 film scripts to his credit. He also collaborated on 30
plays and comedies. He started writing public-school stories, but he
first displayed his legendary wit with his 1913 work _Something New_.
His fame comes from his sharp stories set in Edwardian England. FTP,
name the author who created Bertie Wooster and Jeeves. {OVULATION}
Bleeding starts about two weeks after this event. It is prevented by
progesterone, but this prevention is indirect since progesterone
actually inhibits the realize of follicle stimulating hormone and
leutenizing hormone from the pituitary gland. In this process, a ripe
follicle ruptures, releasing items into a nearly fallopian tube. For
ten points identify this feminine process where an egg is released
from an ovary. Niels Henrik {ABEL} His teacher raised funds for him to
enter the University of Christiana in 1821; his first paper, on
functional equations and integrals, appeared two years later. In 1824,
his pamphlet, which proved that no general method for solving quintic
equations exists, was dismissed by Gauss. Much of his work focused on
integral equations and elliptic functions. FTP, name this Norwegian
mathematician who died at the age of 26, for whom a special type of
group is named, who shares his name with a Biblical figure. {LEANDER}
Poets like Ovid, Musaeus and Marlowe told their own versions of this
hero's story. He would go nightly to see his lover, a virgin priestess
of Aphrodite, guided by a torchlight toward her tower. Unfortunately,
a storm extinguished the light one night and he drowned. Later, after
seeing her lover's body washed up from the Hellespont, Hero drowned
herself in despair. FTP, name this fellow unlucky in love. Ford Madox
{FORD} One of the leaders of the Paris intellectual circle that
included Hemingway and Fitzgerald, he suffered deep psychological
wounds from his service in World War I. His most famous work, "The
Good Soldier," explored the sexual and psychological tensions between
two couples on holiday in England, but he wrote over seventy books,
including two in collaboration with Joseph Conrad. FTP, name this
German-born writer and editor of the "Transatlantic Review." {LIBERTY
BELL} It was commissioned for a new state house in 1751, but the name
by which it is known could not have been justly conceived at that
time. Created in London and bearing an inscription from Leviticus, it
was moved to Allentown in 1777 to protect it from the British. An
Abolitionist named it in 1839, but by that point it had been damaged
remembering the death of John Marshall. For ten points identify this
American symbol that rang its last after the death of George
Washington. Leonard {BERNSTEIN} The first symphony of this composer,
who allegedly had sexual relations with his son-in-law, was subtitled
"The Age of Anxiety." His choral works include a "Missa brevis"; his
second symphony was subtitled "Jeremiah". He wrote a number of ballets
for Jerome Robbins, and some of his songs were recently released on a
CD entitled "New York". FTP, name this American composer of the
"Kaddish Symphony", "Candide", and "West Side Story", the longtime
conductor of the New York Philharmonic. Eugene {IONESCU} A native of
Romania, he moved to France after World War I, where, as a pioneer of
the Theater of the Absurd, he even wrote a scene in which a man and
woman exchange platitudes as strangers only to discover that they are
husband and wife. He favored such surrealism in plays such as "Killing
Game" and "The Bald Soprano." FTP, name the author of "Rhinoceros."
Michael {DUKAKIS} Born in 1933, he graduated from Harvard Law School,
but was a career politician. An unabashed liberal, he introduced a
bill to legalize abortion in his state three years before Roe v. Wade.
As governor, he broke a "lead pipe guarantee" not to raise taxes,
which would turn out to be ironic, considering future events. FTP,
name this architect of the "Massachusetts Miracle" and failed 1988
presidential candidate. Lucius Annaeas {SENECA} A stoic philosopher,
he came from a family of rhetoriticians, and his talents and
credentials earned him a post as a tutor to the Emperor Claudius' son.
He briefly suffered exile to Corsica after sleeping with Claudius'
niece, but his influence with his wife Agrippina gained him a return
from exile. Interestingly, he found the burden of power too great, and
in AD 62 he retired to write some of his best philosophical treatises.
FTP, name this stoic philosopher and tutor of Nero. {ACTION} Planck's
constant is the natural quantum of this property, which limits the
possible states of motion for subatomic particles. The principle of
least time developed by Fermat not only minimizes time, but this
property as well. Defined as twice the average kinetic energy times
the time of measurement or as the average momentum multiplied by the
distance moved, FTP, name this six- letter term which explains why
projectiles in two dimensions always follow parabolic paths. {LOAS}
(low-ah's) While believers of voodoo acknowledge one supreme but
distant god, they really interact with many of these spirits who
attach themselves to individuals or families and demand constant
ritual service. In return, they help, guide and protect their
worshippers. Many of them are patterned after Catholic saints, local
or African gods and divine ancestors. FTP, name these deities. Toni
{MORRISON} One of the most influential African-American authors since
Ralph Ellison, her works explore the interaction among race, heritage,
and culture. Her tenure as senior editor for Random House in the
seventies and eighties allowed her to influence black thought in the
period. She is most famous, of course for her novels, including
"Sula," "Tar Baby," and "The Bluest Eye." FTP, name the Nobel Prize-
winning author of "Beloved." {ARGENTINA} It has a Colorado River, but
it's one of the United States. It has an area called Mesopotamia that
is on a river delta, but it's not Iraq. Its Mesopotamia is mostly
rainforest, but it is also home to the highest point on its continent.
For ten points identify this nation that is divided into four
geographical regions: the northeastern plains, the Pampas, Patagonia,
and the Andes Mountains. Roy { LICHTENSTEIN} 30-20-5, name the artist
from following clues for the stated amount of points.  30: His works
in the 1970's and 80's departed greatly from his earlier works,
emphasizing brush strokes and still lifes, whereas before he painted
western scenes.  20: This American earned the distinction of being the
first American artist to have an exhibit at London's Tate Gallery.  5:
His most famous works imitating comic strips were combinations of
commercial art and abstraction, featuring bright colors, black
outlines. Martin {HEIDEGGER} 30-20-10, name the philosopher:  30: As
Rector of the University of Friedburg, he briefly spoke in favor of
Hitler's educational policies. His involvement with the Nazis did not
diminish his standing, however, in the intellectual community.  20: A
follower of Edmund Husserl, his hermeneutic phenomenology argued
agains the differentiation of subject and object.  10: His major work,
Being and Time, was a major treatise of Existentialism and an
influence on later philosophers such as Sartre. Wolfgang Amadeus
{Mozart-} This composer wrote an opera taking place on Crete in which
a king must sacrifice his own son Idamante.  In addition to composing
Idomeneo, this composer wrote an opera in which Guglielmo and Ferrando
disguise themselves as Albanians and seduce each other’s lovers.  This
composer of (*) Cosi fan Tutte wrote his last opera about Tamino’s use
of a certain instrument to rescue Pamina, the daughter of the Queen of
the Night.  Another of his operas is a sequel to Rossini’s The Barber
of Seville.  For 10 points, identify this composer of Don Giovanni,
The Magic Flute, and The Marriage of Figaro, who is probably best
remembered as an Austrian musical prodigy. {Fahrenheit 451} In one
scene from this novel, the protagonist’s neighbor tells him about a
man in the moon. After that neighbor rubs a flower under his chin,
this work’s protagonist realizes he doesn’t love his wife, who spends
her days in front of the couple’s three (*) wall-sized television and
wants to buy a fourth. This novel’s protagonist lives next to Clarisse
McClellan and meets a professor named Faber, after which he kills
Captain Beatty and is attacked by the Mechanical Hound. Featuring the
protagonist Guy Montag, a fireman who burns books before saving them,
for 10 points, name this work of science fiction by Ray Bradbury
titled after the temperature at which paper ignites. {Mormon}s [or
{Latter-Day Saint}s] One practice of this religion was ended by the
"Second Manifesto." Adherents of this faith often follow the "Word of
Wisdom" as a code that bans alcohol. The sacred text of this religion
was inscribed in "reformed Egyptian" that could only be translated
using a pair of gems. That text was engraved in (*) gold tablets that
were found buried in the earth by the founder of this religion. After
fleeing Nauvoo, Brigham Young led this religious group to settle in
the area around the Great Salt Lake. For 10 points, name this sect
founded by Joseph Smith that colonized Utah. Jorge Luis {Borges} One
story by this author uses the example of a pencil found by someone who
had lost one to describe the concept hronir. Another story by this
author describes how the speaker visits the house of Beatriz Viterbo
on her birthday every year after her death, and in that same work the
speaker lies on his back in their basement in order to observe the
title  point in the (*) universe containing all other points. This
author of “Tlon, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius” and “El Aleph” also wrote a
collection containing a story featuring Richard Madden, who is
pursuing a German agent named Yu Tsun. For 10 points, name this
Argentine author who included “The Garden of Forking Paths” in
Ficciones. {syphilis} The Wassermann test is used to diagnose this
disease.  Modern treatment of it is usually with penicillin, which
leads to the Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction as the infectious agents are
killed.  Paul Ehrlich created Salvasan to treat this disease while
looking for a “magic bullet” to cure sleeping sickness. This disease
progresses through three stages, consisting of sores, rashes, and
internal organ damage respectively.  The species of bacterium that
causes this disease also causes other diseases such as (*) yaws and
pinta, and is named Treponema palladium.  For 10 points, name this
lethal STD, which is caused by a spirochete bacterium. {James I} or
{James VI} [prompt on {James}] As a youth, this man was held hostage
during the Ruthven Raid. Among his key advisers were George Villiers,
the Earl of Buckingham, and Lord Treasurer Robert Cecil. This man’s
The True Law of Free Monarchies expressed his belief in the Divine
Right of (*) Kings, and the Mayflower expedition took place during his
reign, which also saw the Main and Bye plots. Already King of
Scotland, this son of Mary, Queen of Scots took the English throne in
1603 upon the death of Mary’s cousin, Elizabeth I. He was also the
subject of the Gunpowder Plot. For 10 points, name this English
monarch, the first from the House of Stuart, who is the namesake of an
English translation of the Bible. Ronald Ernest {Paul} With the
assistance of the company Terra Eclipse, this man’s 24-hour
fundraising drives were termed “Moneybombs.” Hackers unearthed this
man’s connection with the neo-Nazi group American Third Position, and
a series of (*) newsletters published by this man during the late
1980s and early 1990s contain racist and anti-Semitic content. This
politician’s economic policy is centered on ending the Federal Reserve
and bringing back the Gold standard. In recent elections, this man
placed 2nd in both the New Hampshire Republican primary and Minnesota
caucus. For 10 points, name this Republican representative from Texas.
Franz Peter {Schubert} This composer’s works for piano include the
Three Military Marches and the Wanderer Fantasy. This composer wrote
many lieder, including one based off a Goethe poem, Der Erlkonig.  His
14th string quartet ends with a tarentella and interestingly shares
its name with another of this composer’s lieder, (*) Death and the
Maiden.  The song “Die Forelle” appears in another of his chamber
works.  This composer’s works are arranged by Deutsch number, and in
addition to writing the Trout Quintet, he is known for writing a work
that contains only two movements.  For 10 points, name this Austrian
composer of the Unfinished Symphony. {Athena} [prompt on “Minerva”]
Erichthonius was the by-product of Hephaestus’ attempt to rape this
deity. Aeneas took one object associated with this deity to Rome after
Odysseus and Diomedes stole it from Troy’s citadel. That object was a
wooden statue of this deity known as the (*) Palladium. The head of
Medusa adorns her shield, the aegis. Her gift of an olive grove beat
out Poseidon’s salt spring in a contest to be patron deity of a
certain city. This God was born fully-grown from the head of her
father, Zeus. For 10 points, name this Greek goddess of wisdom and
war, the patron deity of the eponymous city that built the Parthenon
in her honor. Battle of {Iwo Jima} During one phase of this battle,
Hill 362 was attacked by men under Samaji Inoyu. Preceded by a three
day naval bombardment, this battle’s combatants included 5th
Amphibious Corps, which was led by a man who’s nickname was “Howling
Mad,” and that man, Holland Smith, was opposed in this battle by a
general who forbade the use of (*) banzai attacks, Tadamichi
Kuribayashi. The attacking force in this battle was slowed by the
namesake island’s volcanic ash, and its objective was the capture of
airfields near Mount Suribachi. For 10 points, name this battle from
the Pacific Theatre in February 1945 which saw a famous flag raising.
the {Venus of Urbino} Mark Twain once called this painting “the
foulest, the vilest, the most obscenest picture the world possesses.”
A window in the back of this painting holds a potted plant and shows a
tree and a column during twilight. Tapestries hang in the back right
corner of this painting, near a woman in red who stands over a woman
in white rummaging through a (*) cassone.  A small dog is curled up
next to the title figure of this painting, whose right hand clutches
flowers.  For 10 points, name this painting of a reclining nude
female, found in the Uffizi, a work by Titian. {Nero} Claudius Caesar
Augustus Germanicus This man sent Gnaeus Domitius Corbulo on a
successful expedition to subdue the Parthian Tiridates, who had made
himself king of Armenia. This man’s reign endured insurrections in
Britain under Boudicea and, later in Gaul under Vindex. This ruler’s
attempt to build a (*) canal near Corinth nearly bankrupted his
empire. Early on, this ruler was aided by Seneca, who later died in
the Pisonian Conspiracy aimed at this Roman emperor. This son of
Agrippina the Younger would ultimately be crucified, leading to the
Year of the Four Emperors. For 10 points identify this last Julio-
Claudian emperor who apocryphally fiddled as Rome burned in 64 CE.
{Alaska} The islands of Baranoff and Wrangell help make up this
state’s Alexander Archipelago. The Tanana Valley is among this state’s
best sites for agriculture, while above the Brooks Range lies its
northernmost point, (*) Barrow. In 1968, large reserves of natural gas
were discovered near this state’s Prudhoe Bay on its North Slope.
Across the Shelikof Strait lies this state’s Kodiak Island, while its
cities include Valdez, Nome, and Fairbanks. For 10 points, identify
this state that possesses the Aleutian Islands, contains the U.S.’s
highest point, Mt. McKinley, and has its capital at Juneau. {lake}s
[or {pond}s] Jökulhlaups (YO-kuhl-awps) are large outbursts from these
entities. They typically consist of three zones, one of which is the
profundal zone. The majority of these entities undergo fall overturn
although that process does not occur in meromictic ones. In meromictic
ones, such as Nyos, carbon dioxide can build up, sometimes resulting
in (*) limnic eruptions. Billabongs are types of these entities formed
when wide meanders are cut off and are also known as the oxbow type.
Many of the oldest, largest and deepest ones are found in rift
valleys, such as the those in East Africa. For 10 points, name these
bodies of water which include Baikal and Superior. John {Keats} In one
poem by this author, the speaker falls fast asleep and dreams of
“death-pale figures” who warn him of trickery, and that poem by this
author centers on a woman who abandons a knight she had just met.
Another poem by this author asks “where are the songs of Spring?”
while yet another poem by this author of (*) “To Autumn” begins “A
thing of beauty is a joy forever.” This poet is perhaps best known for
a poem in which the speaker refers to the title object as a “still
unravished bride of quietness,” a poem that includes the line “beauty
is truth, truth beauty.” For 10 points, name this author of “La Belle
Dame Sans Merci,” “Endymion,” and “Ode on a Grecian Urn.” Adam {Smith}
One work by this man claims that towns gain their “whole wealth and
subsistence from the country” but that the gains of the two places are
mutual and also claimed that English laws against usury increased
profits. This thinker divided systems of morality into categories of
nature and motive and developed a theoretical basis for sympathy based
on Hume in his The (*)Theory of Moral Sentiments. In his most famous
work he claimed that division of labor would initially lead to
increased productivity. For 10 points, name this Scottish classical
economist who described the ‘invisible hand’ of free markets in his
The Wealth of Nations. {colloid}s Pectizing and peptizing are forms of
producing these substances.  These substances can be classified as
lyophilic or lyophobic.  Its components can be put into categories
such as fibrillar or corpuscular based on their size.  A namesake cone
of polarized (*) light is characteristic of one property of these
substances.  Categories of this substance include emulsions and
aerosols.  Light that is shined through these substances is scattered
through the Tyndall effect.  For 10 points, name these mixtures
containing a dispersed phase and a continuous phase, examples of which
include jelly, milk, smoke, and paint. {Assassination} of {John F.
Kennedy }[accept reasonable equivalents including the use of “JFK”]
Days prior to this event, a prostitute named Rose Cherami claimed to
know of its planning and years later a Dictabelt recording of this
event was discovered. In the wake of this event, Arlen Specter
developed one theory for it and New Orleans District Attorney  Jim
Garrison investigated it. This event occurred on Elm Street near (*)
Dealey Plaza, the main action in this event was carried out from the
4th Floor of the Texas Schoolbook Depository and investigated by the
Warren Commission.  For 10 points, name this November 1963 event
carried out by Lee Harvey Oswald in Dallas, Texas that resulted in
Lyndon Johnson being sworn in as President of the United States.
{current} One form of this quantity is equal to the surface integral
of the partial derivative with respect to time of the electric flux
density. That is this quantity's displacement form. The line integral
of the magnetic field intensity is equal to this quantity according to
Ampere's Law. The circuit device for measuring this quantity is
connected in (*) series with the circuit. This quantity is inversely
proportional to resistance according to Ohm's Law, where it is equal
to divided by resistance. For 10 points, identify this quantity
defined as the rate at which charges flows through a surface and
measured in amperes. Leo {Tolstoy} [or Lev Nikolayevich {Tolstoy}] One
story by this author sees Pahome become increasingly covetous of real
estate, drawing Satan’s attention. In another work by this man, a man
discovers his wife’s affair with a violinist with whom she performs
the title Beethoven work, leading Pozdnyshev to kill that wife. In
addition to penning (*) How Much Land Does a Man Need? and The
Kreutzer Sonata, this author wrote a novel in which Konstantin Levin
is in love with Kitty and the affair of the title character with Count
Vronsky leads to her eventual suicide by train. For 10 points, name
this Russian author of Anna Karenina who also wrote a novel centering
on Napoleon’s invasion of his country in War and Peace. {Yom Kippur}
[or “{Day of Atonement}” before mention] A traditional but now rarely
performed ritual during this holiday involves spinning a chicken
around one’s head. It is said that on this day the Book of Life is
sealed. Before the beginning of services on this day, a declaration of
vows called the (*) Kol Nidre are recited. During this holiday the
vidui or public confession of sins against God occurs. This period
ends the time of year known as the “Days of Awe”, and this holiday
occurs on the 10th of Tishrei. On this day, able adults are prohibited
from having sex, wearing leather, bathing, eating, and drinking. For
10 points, name this holiest day in Judaism, the Day of Atonement.
atomic {orbital}s [or electron {orbital}s; or electron {subshell}s; do
not accept "molecular orbitals"; do not accept "electron shell"] The
second and third quantum numbers describe these entities. These
entities can be hybridized. Effective nuclear charge is based on the
penetration of these entities. Madelung's rules involve the sum of the
principle quantum number and azimuthal quantum number in relation to
these entities. Hund's rule of maximum multiplicity involves (*)
occupation of these entities. The Aufbau principle states that those
of lower energy are filled before those of higher energy. The Pauli
exclusion principle is often explained in terms of these entities. For
10 points, name these entities surrounding a nucleus where one is
likely to find an electron. {Brave New World} One character in this
novel refers to a scientific text as a "beastly, beastly book." Nurses
in this novel are disgusted when that character grieves the death of
his mother. Another character in this work keeps forbidden literature
in a safe, and after his illegal scientific research was discovered,
he became a (*) World Controller. One character in this novel meets
John after being exiled to North America. Reproduction in this novel
is controlled by Podsnap's Technique and the Bokanovsky Process. At
the end of this novel, a "Savage" hangs himself after an orgy brought
on by the drug soma. For 10 points, name this novel by Aldous Huxley.
{Maroon 5} Model Kelly McKee appears in one music video for this band,
where CGI flowers were added to block racy imagery involving her and
this band’s frontman. With Andy Samberg, the singer of this band sang
a lovesong to Mahmoud Ahmadinejad in a SNL ditigal short. One track
from their album Hands All Over opens with the lines “Just shoot for
the(*) stars if it feels right/And aim for my heart if you feel like”
and features vocals from Christina Aguilera. On their 2002 album Songs
About Jane, this band released the songs “Harder to Breathe” and “This
Love.” For 10 points, name this band fronted by singer Adam Levine
that produced the 2011 hit “Moves Like Jagger.” Gabriel {Garcia
}{Marquez} This author chronicled the plight of Luis Alejandro Velasco
for the El Espectador newspaper as “The Story of a Shipwrecked
Sailor.” This author wrote a novella where an old man waits patiently
for a pension check to arrive. This author wrote a work imagining the
final days of Simon Bolivar, as well as a novel in which the (*) gypsy
Melquiades sells miraculous inventions like magnets to the townspeople
of Macondo. That work notably features Ursula, Jose Arcadia and
Colonel Aureliano of the Buendia family. For 10 points, name this
native Colombian author of No One Writes to the Colonel, The General
in His Labyrinth and One Hundred Years of Solitude. {Yangtze} River
[or {Chang Jiang}] In 1871, the USS Monocacy charted this river, and
it is home to the only species of of alligator found in the Eastern
Hemisphere. The Battle of Red Cliffs occurred near this river’s banks,
and its sources are the glaciers at Geladandong in the Tanggula
Mountains. With its longest tributary being the (*) Han, this river
connects with Lake Poyang, and it features the world’s largest
hydroelectric power station. That station is the new but problematic
Three Gorges Dam, and this river passes through Nanjing before
emptying into the East China Sea at Shanghai. For 10 points, name this
Chinese river, which is the longest in Asia. {metamorphic} rocks
Isograds separate zones of these rocks, which are based on the
presence of an index mineral. One process that creates these rocks is
restricted to an aureole and is the contact type. One property of
these rocks can be a result of alternating felsic and mafic layers,
forming light and dark bands. That property can also be due to the
sheets in sheet silicates orienting themselves perpendicular to the
direction of maximum (*) stress. That property of these rocks results
in cleavage along parallel planes and is known as foliation. They
include hornfels and gneiss. For 10 points, name these rocks formed
under high pressure and temperature from igneous or sedimentary rocks.
{Peter the Great} [or {Peter I}; prompt on Peter] This leader sent an
envoy under the command of Boris Sheremetyev [shur-ah- MET-yev] to the
Knights of Malta in order to pursue the possibility of an alliance
against the Ottoman Turks. This man’s military victory at the Battle
of Lesnaya followed a major defeat at (*) Narva, and this creator of
the Table of Ranks once spent time in a Dutch shipyard disguised as a
worker to learn the superior western way of shipbuilding. This ruler
defeated Sweden’s Charles XII at Poltava, thus leading to victory in
the Great Northern War. He took that opportunity to build a capital on
the Neva River that now bears his name. For 10 points, name this czar
who modernized Russia. Richard {Nixon} Journalist Walter Lippmann once
termed this man’s Latin American trip a “diplomatic Pearl Harbor.” His
administration saw the unsuccessful Rogers Plan and the establishment
of the EPA. This man’s performance in one debate was judged
differently between radio and (*) television audiences.  As a
Congressman this man oversaw the Alger Hiss hearings as a member of
HUAC, and he delivered the Checkers Speech while running for Vice-
President. As President, he would notably visit China and achieve
detente with Brezhnev and the USSR.  For 10 points, identify this 37th
U.S. President who resigned in 1974 in the wake of the Watergate
Scandal. {Romulus} During one war begun by this figure, he killed King
Acron of Caenina before reaching a peace with another king, Titus
Tatius, with whom he shared power. According to legend, this figure’s
death saw him disappear into the clouds during a storm. This figure
and his (*) brother had been abandoned by their uncle Amulius and fed
by a woodpecker and a she-wolf before being found by a Shepard. This
son of Rhea Silvia orchestrated the abduction of the Sabine women and
founded a city on the Tiber river. For 10 points, name this first king
of Rome and twin of Remus. {Egypt} Saad Zaghloul, a man from this
country, attempted to bring his Wafd Party to the 1919 Paris Peace
Conference but was deported and sent to Malta, leading to the First
Revolution in this country. One leader of this country was
assassinated by a group of terrorists led by Khalid Islambouli during
a parade commemorating Operation Badr, after giving a speech at the
(*) Knesset. This country invaded Golan Heights during the Yom Kippur
War and caused a crisis after the World Bank withdrew funding for the
Aswan High Dam.  For 10 points, name this country that was invaded
during the Suez Crisis and has been led by Gamal Nasser and Anwar
Sadat. {tuberculosis} [or {TB}; accept {consumption} before it is
read] This disease is treated with Rifampicin and Isoniazid.  BCG is
commonly used as a vaccine for this disease, although its efficacy has
been debated. The miliary form of this disease can spread to other
organs like the liver and spleen. Approximately one third of the
world’s population is thought to be infected with this disease. A
Totally-Drug-Resistant strain of the causative agent of this disease
was recently isolated in India. Only one tenth of all infected people
present with the active form of this sickness, and it is caused by a
(*) Mycobacterium. For 10 points, name this largest killer of AIDS
patients, an airborne contagious disease also called “consumption.”
{Tartuffe} One character in this work is given a casket of papers
containing evidence of treason by the criminal Argas. When the central
character of this work first appears on stage, his first lines express
disapproval of how the maid is dressed.  The love interest of a female
character in this play is disapproved of by Madame (*) Pernelle. At
the end of this play, a representative of the king appears as a Deus
Ex Machina in order to thwart the seizure of the protagonist’s home.
While hiding under a table, Orgon becomes aware of the title
character’s attempts to seduce his wife Elmire. For 10 points, name
this Moliere play about a religious hypocrite. {Archbishop of
Canterbury} While serving in this position, Baldwin of Forde
participated in the Third Crusade along with his eventual successor
Hubert Walter. This position’s significance increased when Theobald
was appointed as legatus natus, and Thomas Arundel would oppose the
Lollards while serving in this role. (*) Reginald Pole, the final
Catholic to sit in this position, served during the Marian
persecutions which claimed his predecessor Thomas Cranmer. Henry II
sent four knights to slay one holder of this position, Thomas a
Becket. Currently held by Rowan Williams, for 10 points, name this
ecclesiastical position, the head of the Church of England. Edward
{Albee} In one of this author’s plays, Martin Gray falls in love with
an animal and reveals this affair to his family on a talk show. This
author’s first play included a character who tells another the story
of Jerry and the Dog before that character pulls a knife on Peter and
impales himself upon it. In addition to writing The Goat, or Who is
Sylvia? and Zoo Story, this author is the creator of a drama in which
(*) Nick and Honey attend a party hosted by George and Martha, who
answers that play’s title question with “I am.” For 10 points, name
this author of “Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf?” {Florence} This city
contains the Brancacci Chapel, which houses many works by Masaccio.  A
door by Lorenzo Ghiberti that was nicknamed the “Gates of Paradise” is
part of this city’s Baptistry.  The Vasari Corridor connects the
Palazzo Pitti to an art museum in this city that contains Leonardo da
Vinci’s Adoration of the Magi and Parmigianino’s Madonna of the Long
Neck.  This city contains a namesake (*) cathedral that was built on
top of the Santa Reparata that is also called the “Duomo.”  For 10
points, name this Italian city that contains the Uffizi and the
Palazzo Medici. Friedrich {Nietzsche } This man compared a composer to
Georges Bizet and expressed disgust at that composer after he was
“born again” and at his anti-semitism. This philosopher used the image
of a "blond beast" in a work written On the Genealogy of Morals. An
early work by this man detailed the origin of Apollonian and (*)
Dionysian forms of the title concept. A Richard Strauss tone poem was
based on a work by this author of The Birth of Tragedy in which the
title prophet descends from the mountains, and in his The Gay Science,
the madman declares that "God is dead." For 10 points, name this
philosopher, the author of Thus Spoke Zarathustra. {spin} angular
momentum Different values of this quantity determine whether one can
use Bose- Einstein or Fermi-Dirac statistics. One component of this
quantity was found to have two opposite values when a beam of hot
silver atoms was passed through a non-uniform magnetic field in an
experiment performed by Stern and Gerlach. Electrons occupying the
same quantum state must have (*) opposite values of it according to
the Pauli exclusion principle. For 10 points, identify this quantity
defined as the intrinsic angular momentum of a quantum mechanical
system and which is an odd multiple of one-half for fermions such as
electrons. Jean {Sibelius} This composer’s fourth symphony features
extensive use of tritones, while his second symphony's third movement
was partially inspired by Mozart's “Don Giovanni”. There is evidence
that he began writing an eighth symphony, though he completed only the
tone poem Tapiola, and incidental music for The Tempest after his
seventh. One of his works features the Alla Marcia march, and his most
famous work was written as a protest against (*) Russian rule of his
country.  For ten points, name this composer who played a major role
in establishing Finnish national identity, especially with his pieces
Karelia Suite and Finlandia. {heart} In fish, this organ carries out
its primary function through the conus. The most popular measure of
this organ's function contains a QRS complex. VSDs and ASDs are
congenital defects in this organ. The innermost layer of tissue of
this organ contains Purkinje fibers. This organ is surrounded by a
double- walled, fluid filled sac. The (*) superior vena cava ends in
this organ's right atrium. The primary function of this organ is
regulated by pacemakers. For 10 points, name this organ responsible
for circulating blood through the body and susceptible to a namesake
"attack." {Native Son} One character in this novel is known to have
donated ping-pong tables to the South Side Boys’ Club. One scene early
in this novel concerns the planned robbery of a deli, which is
thwarted when this novel’s protagonist attacks Gus and forces him to
lick his blade. That protagonist later rapes and kills (*) Bessie in
an abandoned building and tries to frame Jan Erlone for another act he
committed earlier in this novel. Boris Max defends the protagonist at
trial after he kisses Mary Dalton and then accidentally smothers her
with a pillow. For 10 points, name this novel centering on Bigger
Thomas, a work of Richard Wright. {Baptism } The Sikh version of this
practice is preceded by the Ardas prayer and involves the passing of a
sword while stirring Amrit nectar central to this practice. Huldrych
Zwingli did not believe that this practice should be considered one of
the sacraments, and his teachings about this act are practiced by
Mennonites. Mormons have performed this action on (*) Holocaust
victims, and dictate this practice must be by full immersion, followed
by confirmation. This practice rejected by Quakers is notably
performed in the Jordan River. For 10 points, name this practice of
initiating a person into a religion, usually using water. {Six
Characters in Search of an Author}: A Comedy in the Making In one
scene in this play, a character appears only after a host of ladies’
hats and cloaks are taken off and hung on racks. That scene is
followed by one in which a character suggests that another remove her
dress, a scene that was brought about when that man’s wife was sent to
be with his secretary, prompting him to go to the brothel of Madame
(*) Pace [“PAH-chay”]. The Step- Daughter character does appear at the
brothel in this play, which ends with the suicide of the Boy after the
drowning of the Little Girl. This play begins when the title figures
interrupt a rehearsal of The Rules of the Game. For 10 points, name
this Theatre of the Absurd drama by Luigi Pirandello. Giuseppe {Verdi
} In one work by this man, a chorus of Hebrew slaves sings "Va,
pensiero." A song in another opera by this man asks "Who turns the
gypsy's day from gloom to brightest sunshine?" and includes an
instruction to "lift up your hammers!" That song from Il Trovatore is
the (*) "Anvil Chorus." The Duke of Mantua sings that "woman is
fickle" in "La donna e mobile," from the third act of this man's opera
Rigoletto. The title character of an opera by this man sings the arias
"Ritorna vincator" and "O patria mia" before being buried alive with
Radames. For 10 points, name this prolific Italian composer who showed
the death of the title Ethiopian princess in Aida. g{old rush} [accept
clear equivalents such as {gold strike}s or {finding gold}] Fred Trump
and Belinda Mulroney became successful hoteliers during one of these
events, and writer Robert W. Service would record personal accounts
from participants in them. One of these occurred at New Zealand’s
Central Otago District in the town of Gabriel’s Gully, and Big Bend,
Stikine, and Cariboo lend their names to some of the many that have
occurred in (*) British Colombia. In the 1850s, Australia witnessed
the Victorian one of these, while the Klondike one in the Yukon
Territory would inspire the writings of Jack London. For 10 points,
name this type of event in which a large number of people migrates to
find a certain precious metal. Sergei {Rachmaninoff} This man asked to
accompany Vladimir Horowitz in a performance of this composer's Third
Piano Concerto. This man adapted a work by Arnold Bocklin to write
"The Isle of the Dead." A poem by Edgar Allen Poe about
“tintinnabulation that so musically wells” inspired this composer's
The (*) Bells. This composer adapted another man's 24th Caprice into a
work with a well-known 18th variation. During his tours of the West,
crowds often demanded encores of a short piece by this man that was
included in his Morceaux de fantasie. For 10 points, name this Russian
composer who created a Rhapsody on a Theme of Paganini and a “Prelude
in C-sharp Minor.” {Seattle}, Washington (accept Seattle {Storm}
before the first mention of city) Radio host Mitch Levy made a wager
to spank one member of this city’s WNBA team based on her assists to
turnover ratio. A team from this city coached by Lenny Wilkens and led
by Dennis Johnson team won the 1979 NBA title. This city has an MLS
team known as the Sounders, and its NFL team, owned by Paul Allen,
made the 2010-11 playoffs with a (*) losing record. One team in this
city used to play in the Kingdome before moving to Safeco Field, where
it now fields such players as Felix Hernandez and Ichiro. For 10
points, name this city where Sue Bird plays for the Storm, the former
home of the Supersonics, where the Seahawks and Mariners play.
{Ganesh}a [or {Ganapati}, {Vinayaka}, or {Pillaiyar}] This deity
wrapped the serpent Vasuki around his neck. This god is often depicted
holding an object that he broke so that he could record a work
dictates by Sri Veda Vyasa. This god walked around his parents
allowing him to win a race around the (*) world, and more commonly
travels atop a mouse. This remover of obstacles received his most
notable feature after his father Shiva went to visit Parvati and did
not recognize this son of theirs and decapitated him. For 10 points,
name this hindu god with the head of an elephant. {Suleiman} I [accept
{Suleiman the Magnificent} before mention, also accept {Suleiman the
Lawgiver} or {Suleiman Kanuni}] This ruler ordered his servant and
childhood friend Ibrahim executed for treason after previously making
him Grand Vizier. Some 94 mosques were built by this man’s chief
architect, Mimar Sinan. This man’s admiral Barbarossa won the battle
of Preveza over (*) Andrea Doria, and his conquest of Rhodes was far
more successful than his earlier failure to capture Malta from the
Knights of St. John. After successfully defeating Louis II at the
Battle of Mohacs, this husband of Roxelana failed in his siege of
Vienna. For 10 points, name this Ottoman sultan, the son of Salim the
Grim, who oversaw his empire at the height of its power, known as “the
Magnificent.” Diego {Velasquez } One painting by this artist was later
used as the inspiration for Francis Bacon’s Screaming Pope.  A
painting by this artist features a woman lying on her side with her
back towards the viewer, and looks at the viewer in the mirror.  This
painter of a Portrait of Pope Innocent X and of the Rokeby Venus was
the court painter to (*) Charles V. Other works line the walls of
another painting by this artist, in which he includes himself working
on a painting of the Infanta Margarita, her maids, a dog and a dwarf.
For 10 points, name this Spanish painter of Las Meninas. {Thirty
Years’ }War In one battle during this conflict, the Duc d’Enghien used
his cavalry to outflank the tercios of his opponent, eventually
forcing their surrender. In addition to the Battle of Rocroi, another
battle during this conflict saw one side’s forces come under the
leadership of (*) Axel Oxenstierna following the death of his superior
at that Battle of Lutzen. That man, Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden, had
dominated this war by winning at Breitenfeld over the Catholic Count
of Tilly. Beginning with the Second Defenestration of Prague, for 10
points, name this brutal Seventeenth Century European religious war
that concluded after three decades. Islamic Republic of {Pakistan}
Cape Monze and the peninsula of Menora are located near this country’s
largest city, which is locally known as the “City of the Quaid.” The
Zhob and Sutlej are rivers that run through this country, and the
cities of Gwadar and Pasni are found along the Arabian Sea in this
nation’s province of (*) Baluchistan. The Spin Ghar Mountains are cut
by the Khyber Pass on this country’s western border, and it shares the
mountain K2 with China. This country’s largest city is Karachi, and it
has a noted territorial dispute with India over the region of Kashmir.
For 10 points, name this South Asian nation whose capital is
Islamabad. ocean {current}s One of the two major kinds of these
entities are created by cabbeling. Fridtjof Nansen's Fram expedition
proved the existence of one of these. One example of these entities is
the Kuroshio. The global conveyor belt consists of them, as do gyres.
A displacement in these entities by the Coriolis effect is known as
the Ekman spiral. The Humboldt one is associated with (*) upwelling
near Peru. Eddies can be formed by their type formed by wind, surfaces
ones, which are contrasted with deep water ones. For 10 points,
identify these masses of moving water that include the Gulf Stream.
George Gordon, Lord {Byron} This poet denounced the removal of the
Elgin marbles in "The Curse of Minerva." One poem by this author
concludes with the lines "A mind at peace with all below, A heart
whose love is innocent!" This poet of "She (*) Walks in Beauty" was
inspired by a prohibition against pet dogs to keep a bear as a pet at
Trinity College. This poet became famous after the publication of his
tale of Childe Harold's Pilgrimage, which features the first example
of a namesake form of literary hero. For 10 points, name this poet
that inverted the story of a famous seducer in his epic "Don Juan."
Thomas {Paine} This man discussed increasing public debt and the
failings of paper currency in The Decline and Fall of the English
System of Finance. In one work, this thinker advocated giving people
ten pounds every year upon turning fifty as a way to combat poverty,
and in another he likens Christianity and the Bible to a system of
mythology. In addition to Agrarian Justice and The (*) Age of Reason,
he wrote a series of articles that begins “These are the times that
try men’s souls.” That series, The American Crisis, was a response to
the Revolutionary War, and his most famous work outlined the argument
for American independence from Britain. For 10 points, identify this
American pamphleteer who wrote Common Sense. {yellow} The pH indicator
bromothymol blue is this color at low pHs. A class of accessory
pigments of this color in plants has a namesake cycle which converts
pigments that do not quench energy into those that do. That class of
accessory pigments is xanthophyll. Hydrated iron (III) oxide is this
color and is also known as (*) ochre. An intermediate step in the
processing of uranium ore yields a powder named for this color.
Conducting the flame test on sodium yields this color. Phosphorus
appears to be this color when it contains both red and white
phosphorus. For 10 points, identify this color of crystalline sulfur
at room temperature. Andrew {Jackson} This man ordered Fort Gadsden
built at a site where Edmund P. Gaines destroyed a fortification known
as the “Negro Fort.” This leader later authorized the executions of
Alexander Arbuthnot and Robert Ambrister on charges of aiding enemies
during the (*) Seminole campaign. As a commander, he pardoned William
Weatherford, leader of the Red Stick Creeks, after the Battle of
Horseshoe Bend. He enlisted the support of  pirate Jean Lafitte to
help him win a victory, even though Treaty of Ghent had already been
signed. For 10 points, name this American general, nicknamed “Old
Hickory,” who won the Battle of New Orleans and eventually became the
seventh U.S. President. {viscosity} The kinematic form of this
quantity is equal to the dynamic form divided by density. The effects
of this property are most significant in the boundary layer. This
quantity depends on the magnitude or duration of the shear stress in
(*) non-Newtonian materials. The ratio of inertial forces to this
property's forces is known as the Reynold's number. This quantity is
equal to the shear stress divided by the shear strain and is constant
for Newtonian fluids. For 10 points, name this property defined as a
fluid's resistance to flow. {Pennsylvania} As governor, George Wolf
helped pass the Free School Act of 1834 in this U.S. state, and Johan
Printz founded its first permanent settlement at Tincicum Island. This
state was the location of Fries’ Rebellion, and it also saw the Battle
of Bushy Run during Pontiac’s Rebellion. John (*) Dickinson hailed
from this state, from which he wrote “Letters from a Farmer in [this
state]” During the French and Indian War,  George Washington would
surrender Fort Necessity in this state before later losing the Battle
of Germantown and encamping at Valley Forge in the American
Revolution. For 10 points, name this U.S. state where the Declaration
of Independence was signed in Philadelphia. Philip {Roth} One novel by
this man centers around the effects of a Charles Lindbergh
presidential administration in an alternate history. In addition to
writing The Plot Against America, this man is the author of a work
that tells the story of Seymore “Swede” Levov, a former star athlete
whose daughter Mary goes into hiding after setting off a (*) bomb, as
well as a novel in which the Classics professor Coleman Silk is
accused of racism by two students and is eventually revealed to be
black. For 10 points, name this author whose novels An American
Pastoral and The Human Stain were narrated by Nathan Zuckerman.
Maurice {Ravel} This composer wrote Tzigane for the violinist Jelly
D’Aranyi.  One of this composer’s works for piano contains the
movements “Ondine,” “Le Gibet,” and “Scarbo,” the last of which was
written to be more technically difficult than Mily Balakirev’s
Islamey.  A ballet by this composer is about a shepard’s love for a
woman that is helped by Pan and some nymphs.  This composer of (*)
Gaspard de la Nuit and Daphnis and Chloe also wrote an orchestral work
which features the same tune repeated by many different soloists over
an ostinato snare drum.  For 10 points, name this French impressionist
composer of Bolero. {fungi} An structure unique to these organisms,
the Spitzenkorper, is an apical body that is important in determining
the direction of growth of these organisms.  Some types of these
organisms form arbuscules, a type of haustorium.  The only type of
these organisms that have flagella are the chytrids.  These organisms
can enter a symbiotic relationship with (*) plant roots called
mychorrizae.  Members of this kingdom have mycelia, which are made up
of filaments called hyphae, and their cell walls are made of chitin.
For 10 points, name this kingdom, which includes yeasts and mushrooms.
{Heart of Darkness} One episode in this novel concerns the procurement
of rivets which are needed by the protagonist. That man tells of
receiving a job thanks to the influence of his aunt, and late in this
novel that character lies to another character’s “intended” about his
last words. One character in this novel has power over Russian traders
as well as (*) natives who raid surrounding areas for ivory. This
story is told to men aboard the steamship Nellie, and one character’s
death is announced by the simple words, “he dead.” Marlow sails up the
Congo river in search of Kurtz, whose last words are “The horror! The
horror!” in, for 10 points, what novel by Joseph Conrad? Gilbert
{Lewis} With  Randall, this man names a rule which deals with
fugacity. Along with predicting tetra-atomic oxygen and purifying
heavy water, he coined the term “photon,” introduced the concept of
activity, and formulated equations for ionic strength.  Another of
this man’s contributions to chemistry was the formulation of an (*)
acid-base theory which revolves around the exchange of electron pairs.
Figures named after this man are used to classify compounds into
categories such as trigonal bipyramidal and tetrahedral.  For 10
points, name this chemist whose namesake dot structures reveal the
shape and the number of lone pairs of a compound. The {Birth of a
Nation} In this work, Flora jumps to her death to escape the pursuits
of Gus. Later in this film, Flora’s brother Ben Cameron saves Elsie
from the clutches of Silas Lynch, the servant of her father, Senator
Stoneman. The iris shot, color tinting, and cross-cutting were among
the technical innovations of this film, and it features the (*)  Siege
of Petersburg and Sherman’s March. The NAACP protested the showing of
this film because of the use of blackface and heroic portrayal of the
Ku Klux Klan. For 10 points, identify this 1915 D.W. Griffith film.
{Columbia} Located in the Long Island Sound, an island with this name
was once called Little Pea Island. One city with this name is home to
the main campus of the University of Missouri, and the Yakima,
Spokane, and Snake Rivers are tributaries of a river with this name.
That same river also forms the border between (*) Oregon and
Washington, and this word names an Ivy League university in New York
City. For 10 points, identify this word that names the capital of
South Carolina, as well as the federal district that contains the
Smithsonian and the White House. {Madame Bovary} In this novel, one of
the few honorable characters constructs napkin rings, dines at the
Lion d’Or, and collects local taxes. The main couple of this novel
moves to Yonville to prepare for the birth of their child, though they
soon give that child over to a wet nurse. After delivering the child
to the nurse, the main character is introduced to the law clerk (*)
Leon Dupuis. Later, Rodolphe brings his farm hand to the husband of
the title character in order for bloodletting to be performed. The
protagonist of this work has an affair with Rodolphe which ends with
her taking arsenic and dying. For 10 points name this novel about the
unfaithful wife of a doctor by Gustave Flaubert. {Poseidon} [do not
accept “Neptune”] This god changed Caeneus into a man after raping
her.  This god gave Minos the Cretan Bull, but caused Pasiphae to fall
in love with it when Minos failed to keep a promise to sacrifice it.
This god became the father of a talking horse, Arion, by mating with
Demeter while in the form of a stallion. This god had an affair with
(*) Medusa that led to Medusa’s transformation into a monster, and his
children included the cyclops Polyphemus and Triton.  This god’s wife
was Amphitrite, and he would often shipwreck offenders and cause
earthquakes using his trident.  For 10 points, name the Greek god of
the seas. Sir Horatio {Nelson} As a youth, this man went on an Arctic
expedition with Skeffington Lutwidge where he was almost killed by a
polar bear. He received the dukedom of Bronte from Ferdinand IV of
Naples and helped defeat Spain under John Jervis at the Battle of Cape
St. Vincent. This commander who had an affair with (*) Lady Emma
Hamilton cut off French trade to India at the Battle of the Nile and
lost his arm at Santa Cruze de Tenerife. During his greatest battle,
he was shot while aboard his flagship Victory, and uttered “Thank God
I have done my duty” before dying. For 10 points, name this British
admiral who won a key 1805 victory over the French fleet at the Battle
of Trafalgar. {normal} distribution [or {Gaussian} distribution] The
equation of the standard form of this entity is e to the quantity
negative x squared over two all divided by the square root of two pi.
If the number of trials is high, the binomial distribution can be
approximated by this distribution. As the sample size becomes large,
the distribution of a population of means approaches this distribution
according to the (*) central limit theorem. If a random variable has
this distribution, then approximately 68% of its values fall within
one standard deviation of the mean. For 10 points, name this
probability distribution often referred to as the bell curve. Salvador
Domenec Felipe Jacinto {Dali }i Domenech One photograph of this
painter features a series of cats suspended in the air and a floating
chair as this man leaps. A series of classical sculptures are depicted
in an arena in this man's The Hallucinogenic Toreador. A collaboration
with Luis Bunuel led to this man creating the film An (*) Andalusian
Dog. This man depicted elephants being the reflections of swans, and
painted a "disintegration" in his most famous work. That work by this
painter includes ants on a stopwatch and a series of melting clocks.
For 10 points, name this mustachioed, surrealist artist who painted
The Persistence of Memory. Rene {Descartes} One work by this thinker
begins by denying that any of wax’s physical properties are essential
to it, thereby drawing a distinction between perception and judgment.
This thinker also considered and rejected the idea that god might be
deceiving us about the nature of the outside world in the (*) “evil
demon” argument. This originator and fiercest advocate of mind-body
dualism formulated a proof for the existence of god in the third
section of his magnum opus. For 10 points, name this French
philosopher and mathematician, the author of Discourse on Method and
Meditations on First Philosophy. {superconductor}s [do not accept or
prompt on "conductors" or "semiconductors"] Perhaps the most famous
type of material used to create these objects is YBCO. Current can
jump a Josephson junction linking two of these objects. Based on the
presence of a single or double critical magnetic field intensity, they
are classified into Type I and Type II. Their formation is based on
the condensation of Cooper pairs. They expel their magnetic fields in
the Meissner effect, making them perfectly diamagnetic and thus
allowing them to (*) levitate magnets. For 10 points, name these
materials which have zero electrical resistance below a critical
temperature. {Vodon} [or {Voodoo} or {Vodou}] A typical service in
this religion includes a prayer known as “Priye Gine” and often
includes the singing of praises for the spirit of the drums, Hounto.
Independent priests who can be hired in this religion are called
Bokor. One spirit in this religion has dominion over the night and is
named (*) Papa Legba, and he is one of the spirits in this religion
with whom its practitioners use to communicate with the supreme deity,
Bondye. Those spirits are called Loa and often take the form of
Catholic saints and can wear ensembles including top hats. For 10
points, name this syncretic religion whose New Orleans branch
sometimes uses namesake “dolls,” which is practiced primarily in
Haiti. {Syria}n Arab Republic In August 2011, this country’s navy
shelled the city of Latakia. Wikileaks released intelligence that the
United States secretly funneled money to finance activities in this
country, including operating its Barada TV station. This country has
seen fighting in the city of Dara’a, which a French journalist
described as a “Ghetto of Death.” That city is one of several in which
this country’s (*)“Free Army,” led by Riad al-Assad, has clashed with
government security forces, whose brutal tactics have been criticized
by the United States and Arab League. The minority Alawite government
of Bashar al- Assad has faced protests and uprisings in, for 10
points, what Middle Eastern country with capital at Damascus. {Russo-
Japanese} War One major battle in this conflict saw one side conduct a
U-turn led by the flagship Mikasa before crossing the T and being
followed by nighttime torpedo boat attacks. That victory for Admiral
Togo came over a fleet that had earlier been involved in the Dogger
Bank incident.  Beginning with a naval raid on Port (*) Arthur, the
winning side went on to capture that city in a siege as well as
completely routing Alexei Kuropatkin’s army at the Battle of Mukden.
The Battle of Tsuhima Strait occurred in, for 10 points, what conflict
ended by the Teddy Roosevelt-mediated Treaty of Portsmouth, a war that
led to the Revolution of 1905 in the losing country. The {Rubaiyat }of
Omar Khayyam This work’s speaker remarks: “We are no other than a
moving row/Of Magic Shadow-shapes that come and go.” One section of
this work remarks that “the moving finger writes; and having
writ,/moves on,” while another section states that “The Wine of Life
keeps oozing drop my drop,/The Leaves of Life keep falling one by
one.” Utilizing its namesake (*) structure of four iambic pentameter
lines formed into a quatrain, this work was translated to English by
Edward FitzGerald. This work includes the lines “A Book of Verses
underneath the Bough, A Jug of Wine, a Loaf of Bread--and Thou.” For
10 points, name this collection of poetry by Omar Khayyam. {Fox News
}Channel [prompt on “Fox”] During an interview on this television
station, Brett Favre first stated that he wanted to be traded from the
Packers. One program on this network is hosted by a man once involved
in the Iran-Contra Scandal, Oliver North. One host of a show on this
network once claimed that (*)  Barack Obama has a “deep-seated hatred
for white people,” and this network faced criticism when its parent
company donated a million dollars to the Republican Governors Fund.
Owned by Rupert Murdoch’s NewsCorp, for 10 points, name this cable
news station home to Bill O’Reilly, which touts its “Fair and
Balanced” coverage. The Ingenious Gentleman {Don Quixote} of La Mancha
[or El ingenioso hidalgo {don Quijote} de la Mancha] This literary
character is beaten for hiding a suit of armor in a water trough and
forced to watch as his library is burned. He accidentally wins a duel
against Samson Carrasco, and receives his title from an innkeeper in a
case of mistaken identity. This character promises the governorship of
an island to a (*) peasant he recruits to his cause. This title
character pursues the honor of Dulcinea, and in an attempt to defeat
giants with spinning arms, tilts at windmills. For 10 points, name
this wanna-be knight who rides Rocinante as he goes on adventures with
Sancho Panza, a Gentleman from La Mancha created by Miguel de
Cervantes. {Java} [do not accept "JavaScript"] Doc comments for this
language can be produced by including comments started by a forward
slash followed by two asterisks and ended by an asterisk followed by a
forward slash. Checked exceptions were first devised for this
language. Almost all code in this language must be located inside a
class. IDEs written in, and primarily for, it include Eclipse and
NetBeans. It is touted as (*) "write once, run anywhere." Source code
in this language is compiled into bytecode which runs on a namesake
virtual machine. For 10 points, name this language originally designed
by James Gosling at Sun Microsystems. {Jainism} One leader of this
faith once let insects bite at him for 12 years. Bowing to various
souls and monks called Acharya is a step in the Namokar mantra
fundamental to this faith. In this faith, the concepts of Right View,
Right Knowledge and Right Conduct are known as its (*) “three Jewels.”
This religion was founded by Mahavira, one of 24 beings called
Tirthankaras by this religion’s followers, who also take a vow of
Ahimsa, which is why followers of this faith are vegetarians and do
not harm any living beings. For 10 points, name this primarily Indian
religion that practices total non-violence. {Falklands} War One weapon
used in this conflict was the Exocet anti-shipping missile, which the
losing side in this conflict used to sink the HMS Sheffield. After
landing at Port San Carlos, one side in this conflict recaptured (*)
Goose Green, and that side, which utilized the Harriet vertical
takeoff fighter/bomber in this conflict, also landed on South Georgia
Island. Started in part by Leopoldo Galtieri  in order to distract his
people from domestic troubles, this war ended shortly after the
capture of Stanley on one of the islands that this conflict’s losers
called Las Malvinas. For 10 points, name this short 1982 war fought
between the United Kingdom and Argentina over the namesake South
Atlantic islands. {New Zealand} This country’s Rotorua caldera is a
part of the volcanic system named for its largest lake.  The Huka
Falls empty that lake, Lake Taupo, into the Waikato River, which names
a university in this country’s fourth-largest city, Hamilton.
Tauranga lies on this country’s Bay of Plenty and this country’s
largest (*) island contains both the Southern Alps and the city of
Christchurch.  The Cook Strait separates this country’s North and
South Islands and borders its capital, Wellington. For 10 points, name
this nuclear- free neighbor of Australia, a Pacific country whose
largest city is Auckland. Oscar {Wilde} Lady Cheveley attempts to
blackmail Sir Robert Chiltern into investing in an Argentine canal
scheme in one work by this man. In another work by this author, the
title character absconds to Lord Darlington’s after discovering her
husband’s affair with Lady Erlynne. Those works by this writer are An
Ideal Husband and (*) Lady Windermere’s Fan. In one play by this
writer, Cecily Cardew loves Algernon Moncrieff, who learns he is
bunburyist Jack Worthing’s younger brother. In his only novel, Basil
Hallward creates a painting which preserves the title character’s
youth. For 10 points, name the author of The Importance of Being
Earnest and The Picture of Dorian Gray. {Theseus} When he came of age,
this figure lifted up a rock to find sandals and a sword.  Lycomedes
killed this figure by pushing him off a cliff.  Earlier, this man set
out on a journey that saw him kill Sciron by feeding him to a turtle
and snap Sinis in half using two pine trees.  One of this figure’s
wives, Phaedra, fell in love with his son (*) Hippolytus.  He reunited
with his father Aegeus after taking a journey to reach Athens, a city
he would later rule.  This man abandoned Ariadne on the island of
Naxos after she helped him escape the Labyrinth.  For 10 points, name
this Greek hero who slew the Minotaur. {World War I }[accept the{
First World War}, The {Great War,} prompt on “The War to End All
Wars”] In this war, the Battle of the Frontiers preceded an engagement
where General Charles Lanrezac’s replacement Franchet d’Esperey
managed to create a gap between his enemy’s 1st and 2nd Armies,
utilizing reserves marshaled to the front in (*) taxicabs. Liman von
Sanders threw back Ian Hamilton’s ANZAC troops in the Gallipoli
Campaign in this war, whose only major naval confrontation was the
Battle of Jutland. The first ever tank attack occurred during the
Battle of the Somme in this war. It was sparked by the assassination
of Franz Josef I’s heir by Gavrilo Princip. For 10 points, name this
war begun in 1914 with Franz Ferdinand’s death and ended at the Treaty
of Versailles. “{The Yellow Wallpaper}” In this short story, John asks
the narrator “What is it, little girl?” and “Can you not trust me as a
physician?” The central location of this work had previously been a
nursery, a playground and a gymnasium. The narrator of this story
writes obsessively in a secret journal and grows to fear her (*)
husband. The narrator of this work grows obsessed with the title
object, seeing a trapped woman lurking in the pattern, and eventually
scratches and peels it to set the woman free. For 10 points, name this
story of a woman undergoing a rest cure who descends into psychosis
over ugly décor, a proto- Feminist work by Charlotte Perkins Gilman.
{Liberty Leading the People} At the bottom of this painting is a
royalist soldier wearing an epaulet and a body with just one sock and
some visible pubic hair. The title figure is known as Marianne and
wears a Phrygian cap as she steps over a blue-shirted man, the only
individual in this painting actually looking at her. Smoke rises above
(*) Notre Dame in the background. At center, a bare-breasted woman
holds a musket in one hand and hoists the French tricolor flag in the
other. For 10 points, name this allegorical depiction of the 1830 July
Revolution, a painting by Eugene Delacroix. {Black Panther} Party [or
{Black Panthers}; do not accept “New Black Panther Party”] Chicago
police shot and killed one member of this organization, Fred Hampton,
while he was sleeping. “Blood of the Beast” is a section of a work by
a member of this group, Soul on Ice by Eldridge Cleaver. They wrote
the “Ten Point Program,” and requested an exemption from military
service for all (*) blacks in their “What We Want, What We Believe”
platform.  The FBI’s COINTELPRO program distributed a racist coloring
book attributed to this organization. For 10 points, name this
organization founded in Oakland by Bobby Seale and Huey Newton, a
black nationalist group that espoused Maoist political philosophy.
Aaron {Copland} This composer included “I Bought Me a Cat” and
“Ching-a-Ring Chaaw” in Old American Songs. The movements “Paisaje
Mexicano” and “Danza de Jalisco” appear in his Three Latin American
Sketches.  Another of this composer’s works features “Camptown Races”
and ends with the (*) speaker reading the final lines of the
Gettysburg Address.  One of this composer’s ballets contains a famous
“Hoedown,” while another was commissioned by Martha Graham and
contains the Shaker hymn “Simple Gifts.”  For 10 points, name this
American composer of A Lincoln Portrait who is best known for his
ballets Rodeo and Appalachian Spring. nuclear {fusion} One form of
this process is catalyzed by muons. It can occur via the CNO cycle.
One proposed form of  this process involves magnetic confinement of a
plasma in a tokamak. The fact that the Coulomb barrier must be
overcome for this process to occur is a common argument against its
(*) "cold" type. Stellar nucleosynthesis of elements lighter than iron
mostly occurs through this process. It occurs upon the detonation of a
hydrogen bomb, where it is initiated by nuclear fission. For 10
points, name this process in which two or more nuclei are combined
into one. Steven Vincent {Benet} This author wrote a story where the
protagonist crosses the river Ou-dis- sun to reach the Place of the
Gods, where he sees a stone carved with the word UBTREAS and prays to
a god named ASHING; that work is By the Waters of Babylon. Another
work by this man invokes an “American muse,” “strong and diverse,” and
includes the lines “I shall not rest quiet at Montparnasse” and “bury
my (*) heart at Wounded Knee” in the section “American Names.” “John
Brown’s Body” is a work by, for 10 points, what man, who wrote about
Jabez Stone selling his soul to Mr. Scratch in “The Devil and Daniel
Webster?” {Arthropoda} [or {arthropod}s] Some members of this phylum
use the caridoid escape reaction. Major segment of this phylum's body
plan are known as tagma. A major subphylum of this phylum is
distinguished by the presence of appendages located before the mouth
called chelicerae. The telson and uropods form the tail fan of some
members of this phylum. Like Mollusca, members of this phylum have an
open circulatory system. Many members of this phylum have an (*)
exoskeleton made of chitin. For 10 points, name this largest extant
phylum that includes insects and crustaceans. ANSWER:{Mughal} Empire
The second ruler of this empire was defeated Sher Shah Suri and only
regained his kingdom 15 years later with the help of Shah Tahmasp I.
The first English ambassador to the court of this empire was Sir
Thomas Roe, who managed to obtain protection for a trading factory at
Surat from the fourth ruler of this empire. The reign of another ruler
of this empire saw the emergence of the(*) Marathas and the Sikhs as
major powers. The fifth ruler of this empire sat on the Peacock Throne
and built the Jama Masjid, the Lal Qila and the Taj Mahal. For ten
points, name this empire which dominated much of North India and whose
rulers included Aurangzeb, Shah Jahan and Akbar. {hydrogen} Carbon
monoxide, carbon dioxide, and a gas made of this element are found in
syngas.  This element is added to fats and oils in order to saturate
them. Most of this element's pure form is generated by reacting
natural gas with water under high temperature and pressure.  Nitrogen,
(*) oxygen, and fluorine can form bonds named after this element with
it.  Brønsted–Lowry acid or base activity is determined by the ability
of a species to gain or lose a cation of this element. For ten points,
name this lightest element, which has symbol H. Ansel {Adams} One work
by this artist shows a young woman engaging in baton practice and
appears in a book by this man titled Born Free and Equal. In addition
to a series about Manzanar War Relocation Center, along with Imogen
Cunningham and Edward Weston, this man founded the group (*)  f/64
[“F-STOP-64”]. One of his photos shows receding clouds, snowy
mountains and pine trees and is entitled Clearing Winter Storm, while
another depicts a New Mexico town just before dusk. For 10 points,
name this American photographer of Moonrise, Hernandez New Mexico and
Moon and Half Dome known for black and white photos of Yosemite.
Johann Wolfgang von {Goethe} In one of this man’s novels, a married
couple of Eduard and Charlotte struggles with their respective desires
for Ottilie and the Captain, while another work by this man features
the Society of the Tower. In addition to Elective Affinities and
Wilhelm Meister’s Apprenticeship, this author wrote a novel in which
the title character fails to win over the wife of Albert, leading him
to (*) commit suicide because of his love for Lotte. In Part I of this
author’s magnum opus,  two apes brew potion in a witch’s cave,
Walpurgis Night’s Dream is performed and the title scholar wagers his
soul with the devil Mephistopheles. For 10 points, name this prolific
German writer of The Sorrows of Young Werther and Faust. {Doppler
effect} [or {Doppler shift}] One type of this phenomenon is specific
to special relativity and is the most direct form of time dilation.
That type of this phenomenon was separated from the longitudinal type
in the Ives-Stilwell experiment. Edwin Hubble used it to determine
that the universe was expanding. This phenomenon can be used in
astronomy to calculate the speed of receding galaxies by observing the
(*) redshift of spectral lines. A common example of it is the change
in pitch of the siren of a passing ambulance. For 10 points, identify
this effect in which the frequency of a wave is changed when an
observer is moving relative to its source. Alexander {Hamilton} This
man wrote two pamphlets responding to Samuel Seabury’s attack of the
First Continental Congress. At the Battle of Yorktown, this man
commanded three infantry battalions in taking a redoubt, while at the
Constitutional Convention this man made a speech opposing the states’
rights positions of William Patersen. In his most prominent office, he
showed his British sympathies in Report on a (*) National Bank and
penned the Report on Manufacturers. Earlier, this politician
collaborated with John Jay and James Madison in writing The Federalist
Papers. For 10 points, identify this first Treasury Secretary, who was
killed in an 1804 duel by Aaron Burr. {electronegativity} Allen and
Sanderson independently developed two different methods for
calculating  this property, the former utilizing the average energy of
the valence electrons while the latter calculating the ratio of the
actual charge denisty to the expected charge denisty extrapoloated
from noble gas data.  It is often calculated by taking the arithmetic
mean of (*) electron affinity and ionization energy according to the
Mulliken scale, and this property increases moving right and up along
the periodic table. For 10 points, name this atomic property proposed
by Linus Pauling which measures the ability to attract electron
density, exhibited highly in oxygen and fluorine. Thomas {Hobbes} This
philosopher was criticized in several works by John Bramhall, and his
De Corpore shares many viewpoints with his most famous work.  In his
Elements of Law, this man argued that men give names to objects in
order to give perception to those objects.  This philosopher saw human
nature as completely (*) materialistic and selfish.  His best-known
work is separated into parts such as “Of Commonwealth” and “Of Man,”
and claimed that the best government is an absolute monarchy.  In that
work, he said man’s life to be “nasty, brutish, and short.”  For 10
points, name the author of Leviathan. {David Copperfield} In this
novel, Little Em'ly breaks up with her adoptive brother Ham to marry
James Steerforth. Mrs. Gummidge and Mr Peggotty live in an upside-down
boat, and later the title character boards with Mrs Crupp while
working as a proctor for the law firm (*) Spenlow and Jorkins. The
protagonist of this work meets Tommy Traddles at Salem House and is
forced to work in his stepfather Mr Murdstone’s wine-bottling
business. Near the end of this novel, the schemes of Uriah Heap are
discovered, and the protagonist marries Agnes Wickfield.  For 10
points, name this semi-autobiographical novel by Charles Dickens.
{earthquake}s These events occur frequently in Benioff zones. Henry
Reid proposed elastic rebound theory to explain these events. These
events can cause sand boils as a result of liquefaction. An area of
the earth between 104 and 140 degrees from these events is known as a
shadow zone because the liquid outer core refracts and stops (*) P and
S waves, respectively. Although now measured on the moment magnitude
scale, they used to be measured on the Richter scale. The point on the
earth directly above the focus of these events is the epicenter. For
10 points, name these geologic events which occur near faults and
result in the shaking of the earth. {New Orleans}, Louisiana A 1788
fire during the Spanish rule of this city destroyed over 75% of its
buildings and led to the construction of the Cabildo and the
Presbytere. The Sieur de Bienville was responsible for the initial
planning of most of this city.  City Park and Lakeview were built
after the(*) drainage of much of the northern part of this city.  Near
this city’s suburb of Metairie is the Lake Pontchartrain Causeway, and
this city is home to the Tremé and French Quarter neighborhoods. For
10 points, name this city in which a notable Mardi Gras celebration
occurs, and which was heavily flooded by Hurricane Katrina. {Hanseatic
League} [or {Hansa}] One outpost controlled by this organization was
the Steelyard in London. Following the capture of Visby by this
organization, it signed the Treaty of Stralsund with Vlademar IV of
Denmark. (*) Cog ships were crucial for the success of this
organization, and its trading posts were known as kontors. This
organization’s power waned with the rise of the Swedish and Dutch
empires, but it was centered on Lübeck and included the cities of
Bremen and Hamburg. For 10 points, name this medieval trade
confederation consisting of northern European cities. The {Garden of
Earthly Delights} One section of this work of art depicts a dark
Creation in a globe populated only by plants. At the left of this
work, God holds Eve by the wrist and a unicorn drinks from a pool in
the middle of which sits a large pink flower-fountain.  The center of
this work depicts many people riding animals like deer, camels, horses
and (*) griffins.  On the right, a birdlike creature eats a man while
excreting people from a toilet-throne. Its central section depicts a
strawberry and cherry-fed orgy where naked people crawl into eggs,
mollusks and even a bird. For 10 points, name this triptych by
Hieronymus Bosch. {Hannibal} Barca This man’s soldiers once attached
flaming torches to the horns of cattle and charged the beasts through
a mountain pass to scare away defenders. Earlier in that campaign,
this leader captured Saguntum and successfully ambushed foes in the
fog at Lake Trasimene. This man’s greatest victory came when he
ordered the center of his line to give ground until he was able to (*)
encircle and slaughter a force under the command of Varro and Paullus.
That victory at the Battle of Cannae was short lived, and this man was
defeated by Scipio Africanus at the Battle of Zama. For 10 points,
name this general who marched an army over the Alps and into Italy
during the Second Punic War, a Carthaginian leader. {Freya} [or
{Freyja}; do not accept “Freyr”] This deity once lost an ale-brewing
contest with Odin, and the giantess Hyndla once recognized the
disguise that this deity gave to Ottar.  This deity’s hall Folkvagnir
houses half of all of the slain, the other half going to Valhalla.
According to one story, this wife of (*) Od was impersonated by a god
who ate a whole oxen in order to trick Thrym, and another story tells
of Loki’s use of this deity’s falcon-cloak to rescue Idunn. This
goddess gained the necklace Brisingamen by sleeping with four dwarves,
and she rode in her chariot pulled by two cats in Baldr’s funeral
procession. For 10 points, name this daughter of Njord and sister of
Frey, the Norse goddess of Love and Fertility. {Lost} In this show, a
meteorite destroys a Mr. Cluck’s Chicken Shack restaurant. A statue of
the deity Taweret was also destroyed on this show, broken into pieces
by the impact of the slave ship The Black Rock, which carried (*)
Richard Alpert. Later, Richard would serve under the mysterious Jacob,
who prevented the Man in Black from leaving this show’s main location.
In the series finale of this show, Jacob’s position is taken by Hurley
after it was briefly held by Jack Shephard. For 10 points, name this
ABC show about the survivors of the Oceanic 815 plane crash, set on a
strange island. {DNA replication} Geminin inhibits this process, while
enzymes involved in it include the Flap endonuclease and
topoisomerase.  A similar process that occurs in plasmids is called
“rolling circle,” and this process occurs in two opposite directions
in prokaryotes.  This process sees the creation of a (*) leading
strand and a lagging strand, the latter of which is made of Okazaki
fragments, which are joined by a ligase.  A primer is necessary for
this process, which occurs during the S phase of the cell cycle and
whose main action is carried out by the namesake polymerase.  For 10
points, identify this cell process in which genes are copied. Jules
{Verne} In one novel by this author, scientists in the title location
become enemies due to the Crimean War. This author of The Adventures
of Three Englishmen and Three Russians in South Africa also wrote a
novel about a group of prisoners who escape and meet Prince Dakkar at
the title geographical formation they name for Abraham Lincoln. In
addition to The (*) Mysterious Island, this author wrote a novel in
which Phileas Fogg wagers he can pull of the title feat, and another
novel in which Pierre Arronax discovers the Nautilus. For 10 points,
name this author who penned Around the World in Eighty Days and
created Captain Nemo in Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea. {Shia
}Islam or {Shiites} Not all members of this group believe in the
occultation and eventual return of an imam, but it is an important
tenet of the Twelvers, one sect within this group. This group reveres
a figure that was martyred at the Battle of (*) Karbala. Its adherents
reject the legitimacy of the Rashidun Caliphate, and it considers a
cousin of Muhammad the true first Imam. This branch of Islam is
particularly popular in Iraq and Iran.  For 10 points, name this major
sect of Islam which venerates Ali, and holds that imams are appointed
by God and not elected by people, in contrast with the beliefs of
Sunnis. Sylvia {Plath}   [JD/JG] The title poem of one of this
author’s collections begins "Stasis in darkness/then the substanceless
blue." That collection contains a poem where the speaker begins “I
have done it again/one year in every ten.”  In a novel by this author,
Buddy Willard admits he slept with a waitress and Dr. Gordon
prescribes (*) electric-shock therapy for the protagonist. In addition
to that novel about Esther Greenwood, the speaker of one of this
author’s poems tells the title figure “there’s a stake through your
black heart,” before declaring “I’m through.” For 10 points, name this
author who included “Lady Lazarus” and “Daddy” in her collection Ariel
in addition to writing The Bell Jar. Ieoh Ming {Pei } Cliff-dwellings
inspired this architect’s design for the Mesa Laboratory in Colorado.
One skyscraper designed by this man's firm had to use wooden supports
to avoid losing window frames when the wind blew. This man designed
the John Hancock building in Boston and the (*)  Bank of China Tower.
This man was chosen by Jacqueline Kennedy to design the John F.
Kennedy Presidential Library. One building designed by this man slopes
up to a tower on the shore of Lake Erie.  That building is the Rock
and Roll Hall of Fame Museum.  For 10 points, name this Chinese-
American architect of the glass pyramids at the L'ouvre. violon{cello}
Heitor Villa-Lobos’ Bachianas Brasileiras No.1 is scored for an
ensemble composed solely of this instrument.  Luigi Boccherini wrote
twelve concertos for this instrument, and it is the solo instrument in
Max Bruch’s Kol Nidre. Elgar’s concerto for this instrument was
popularized by Jacqueline du Pre. Bach’s  Six Suites for this
instrument were notably recorded by Pablo (*) Casals, and the first of
them in G major opens with an often-played Prelude. For 10 points,
name this instrument, which is played by Yo-Yo Ma and is smaller than
a double bass. Isabel {Allende} A recent novel by this author concerns
Tete, a mulatto woman sold to Toulouse Valmorain, the owner of a
Haitian sugar plantation. In another novel, this writer describes a
woman who goes to La Senora’s brothel, is accused of the murder of
Zulema Halabi, and finally marries Rolf Carle. In addition to The
Island Beneath the Sea and Eva Luna, this author created a family that
lives in the (*)“big house on the street,” includes Clara, a
telekenetic who can move a three-legged table, and Esteban, who
enlists help to rescue his granddaughter Alba from the military. For
10 points, name this Chilean novelist who wrote about three
generations of the Trueba family in The House of the Spirits.
{Leviticus} This book recommends the sacrifice of a bull and a goat
for the sins of its constituency. Its later chapters lay out
punishments for worshiping Molech and state that the High Priest can
only enter the Holy of Holies on the Day of Atonement. One episode in
this book describes the ordination of Aaron, and its eleventh chapter
bans the consumption of (*) pork. Named for the tribe from which
Hebrew priests were chosen, and laying out the ritual obligations of
the Hebrews’ covenant with God, for 10 points, name this book of the
Old Testament often used by conservative Christians to justify bigotry
against homosexuals. Franz {Kafka} In one work by this author,
Delamarche and Robinson help get Karl Rossmann menial jobs until Karl
escapes to Oklahoma.  Another work by this author sees Leni fall in
love with the protagonist, who is not helped by his lawyer Herr Huld
after he is arrested for an unknown crime.  This author of Amerika
wrote about (*) Josef K in The Trial.  In this man’s most famous
novella, the protagonist is wounded when his father throws an apple
that gets stuck in his back, which occurs after he awakes to discover
he is vermin.  For 10 points, name this author, who wrote about Gregor
Samsa in The Metamorphosis. {four} This number is the period, in pi
units, of e to the quantity i x over two. Any number can be expressed
as the sum of this many integer squares. This number is the highest
degree polynomial generally solvable by an algebraic equation. The
only Platonic solid with an equal number of vertices and faces has
this many of each. If the last two digits of a number are (*)
divisible by this number, then that number is divisible by this
number. It is the smallest non-prime number and the only one whose
prime factors are equal both when multiplied and when added. For 10
points, identify this number of vertices of a tetrahedron and the
number of sides of a square. Oliver {Cromwell} This man first saw
military action fighting under Robert Devereux at the Battle of
Edgehill. This man’s power increased after John Lambert helped curb
the authority of the Assembly of Saints, and before acquiring Jamaica
and the port city of Dunkirk, this leader suppressed(*) the Leveller
movement. One of his victories came at Naseby, leading the New Model
Army with which he also won the Battle of Marsten Moor before signing
Charles I’s death warrant, effectively ending the English Civil War.
For 10 points, name this English general who served as Lord Protector
during the Interregnum. {William Tell} [or {Guillaume Tell}] In this
opera, Arnold sings the demanding "Friends, Friends, assist my
vengeance." The title character is forced to steer a boat to safety
from a storm during his execution. One event in this opera occurs
after the title character refuses to bow to an elevated hat belonging
to (*) Gessler. The title character of this opera pleads in "Sous
immobile" for Jemmy to hold still. The opening of this work begins
with a depiction of dawn and ends with a mad cavalry charge. The title
figure of this opera is forced to shoot an apple off his son's head.
For 10 points, name this Giacomo Rossini opera about a Swiss patriot
with is particularly known for its namesake "overture." {Ramayana} One
character in this work, an avatar of Shiva, is the son of Kesari and
Anjana.  The protagonist intervenes to let Sugriva wrest a throne from
his brother Vali and the eagle Jatayu loses his life attempting to
stop a kidnapping. The protagonist was banished by his father,
Dasharatha, from the kingdom of (*) Ayodhya on the orders of
Dasharatha’s jealous wife Kaikeyi. Hanuman appears in this work, and
his monkeys build a bridge to the island of the antagonist of this
work, which was allegedly written by the Hindu sage Valmiki. For 10
points, name this Hindu epic which tells the story of the eponymous
warrior-king-hero rescuing his wife Sita from the clutches of the evil
Ravana. {Mansa Musa} [accept {Musa} I] During the reign of this ruler,
he sent his forces to capture the important salt-producing center of
Taghaza and one of this man’s generals was a man named Sagmandia. This
man’s primary architect was Abu Ishaq es Saheli, who designed and
built Sanghore University and the (*) Gao mosque. Succeeded by his son
Magha, one event during this man’s reign led to massive inflation and
the destruction of the gold standard in Egypt due to an overabundance
of this man’s gold, which came from the massive wealth attained
through trade centers such as Timbuktu in this man’s empire. For 10
points, name this 12th century ruler of Mali, who undertook a famous
pilgrimage to Mecca. Grant DeVolson {Wood} After one organization
protested this artist’s use of stained-glass produced in Munich for a
World War 1 memorial, this artist made one painting satirizing three
old women, one daintily holding a teacup with ringless fingers, as
they stand in front of Washington Crossing the Delaware. That painting
is (*)  Daughters of Revolution. In this man’s most famous painting, a
red barn stands next to a white house, in front of which are two
figures who are not smiling. In that painting by this man, a woman
stands next to her father, who wears glasses and is holding a
pitchfork.  For 10 points, name the artist of American Gothic.
{Finland }[accept {Suomi}] One episode in this country’s history,
known as the Lesser Wrath, was brought about by a neighboring
country’s Hat party and resulted in the this country’s occupation. The
Treaty of Tilsit allowed Russia to conquer this country, and Tsar
Alexander II created its Diet. The Continuation War saw this country
side with Germany during Operation Barbarossa  not long after it was
forced to surrender after the collapse of the (*) Mannerheim Line in
the Winter War. This country gained Independence from Russia following
the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk. For 10 points, name this Northern
European, non-Scandinavian neighbor of Sweden with capital at
Helsinki. The {Netherlands} One city in this country features the Cube
Houses designed by Piet Blom, while that same city also contains the
Euromast tower, constructed for the Floriade, a horticultural
exhibition in this country. The West Frisian Islands are separated
from this country’s mainland by the Wadden Sea, and the (*) Amstel
River terminates in its capital. This nation’s Delta Works helps to
prevent flooding in provinces like Zeeland, and its Peace Palace
houses the International Court of Justice in The Hague. Featuring
numerous windmills, for 10 points, name this low-lying country with
cities such as Utrecht and Rotterdam and whose capital is Amsterdam.
{enzyme}s [prompt on {protein}s] These molecules can be regulated by
covalent modification. Daniel Koshland suggested the induced fit model
of these moecules. Trypsin and pepsin A are both types of these.
Methanol poisoning is cured by ethanol because ethanol competitively
inhibits one of these by binding to its (*) active site. One of the
earliest models of their behavior treated a substrate as a lock and
them as a key. One of these molecules found in the liver breaks down
hydrogen peroxide and is catalase. For 10 points, identify these
proteins that lower the activation energy of biochemical reactions.
Thomas Ruggles {Pynchon} , Jr. In one novel, this author wrote about
Pugnax, a dog who reads a book about anarchism and is a member of the
Chums of Chance. In addition to Against the Day,  this author’s other
works include one where George Washington smokes marijuana with the
title surveyors and a work where the protagonist  meets a man named
Metzger, a former child actor who went by the name “Baby Igor.” That
protagonist is (*) Oedipa Maas, who is tasked with executing Pierce
Inverarity’s will.  In another work, this author of Mason & Dixon
wrote about Tyrone Slothrop’s search for a V-2 rocket.  For 10 points
name this reclusive American author of The Crying of Lot 49 and
Gravity’s Rainbow. Noam (Avram) {Chomsky} In this man's Pisa Lectures,
he discussed the theta criterion, which requires a one-to-one
correspondence between arguments and theta-roles such as Agent and
Patient, and developed the "principles-and-parameters" approach behind
his Government-Binding Theory. With Morris Halle, he co-wrote The (*)
Sound Patterns of English in 1968, and his first work, Syntactic
Structures, introduces his concept of transformational-generative
grammar and includes the sentence "Colorless green ideas sleep
furiously". A proponent of "universal grammar" and a well-known author
of anarchist and anti-capitalist texts, for 10 points, name this MIT
professor, a founding figure of modern linguistics. {carbon} Atoms of
this element can be arranged into nanotubes that have high levels of
conductivity. This is the first element to have two electrons in a p
orbital. This is the most common element to form long chain like
structures via covalent bonds. The study of compounds that contain
this element is known as (*) organic chemistry. Fullerenes are
composed only of this element. The most abundant stable isotope of
this element is the basis for atomic mass. An isotope of this element
with a half-life of about six thousand years is commonly used for
radioactive dating. For 10 points, name this element whose allotropes
include diamond and graphite. Battle of {Antietam} [or Battle of
{Sharpsburg}] At this battle, the Irish Brigade took heavy casualties
assaulting the Sunken Road, which soon became known as Bloody Lane.
Dunker Church was held by Stonewall Jackson, who days before took the
armory at Harper’s Ferry. After this battle, George (*) McClellan was
stripped of his command for not pursuing a retreating Robert E. Lee,
though Lincoln would still use this Union victory to issue the
Emancipation Proclamation.  For 10 points, name this Civil War battle,
the bloodiest day in US history, fought on September 17, 1862 near a
Maryland town. {index of refraction} [or {refractive index}] This
quantity is approximately equal to the square root of the relative
permittivity for most materials. The main research in metamaterials is
on ones that have negative values for this quantity. The arctan of the
ratio of this quantity is equal to Brewster's angle. The phase
velocity is equal to the speed of light divided by this quantity. Its
ratio is equal to the (*) sines of the angle of incidence and
refraction according to Snell's law. For 10 points, name this
quantity, symbolized n, that is defined as the speed of light in a
vacuum divided by the speed of light in a medium. William Butler{
Yeats} In one poem by this author, the speaker says the title
creatures “paddle in the cold,” while visiting a place where “All’s
changed” in the nineteen Autumns since his last visit. In another poem
by this co-founder of the Abbey Theater, the speaker remarks that
"Those that I fight I do not hate/Those that I guard I do not love,”
and this poet remarked that “A (*)  terrible beauty is born” at the
end of a poem about the Easter Uprising. This poet wrote that a “rough
beast” slouches towards Bethlehem to be born." For 10 points, name
this Irish poet of “The Wild Swans at Coole,” “An Irish Airman
Foresees His Death,” “Easter, 1916,” and “The Second Coming.” “The
{Waste Land}” In this poem, a rooster perches on an abandoned chapel
where “only the wind’s home,” and the speaker groups Jerusalem, Vienna
and Athens among the “unreal cities.” Another section of this poem
describes a woman sitting in a chair like a throne, waiting for her
lover, and that section also depicts two women discussing the return
of a husband from the army as the bartender repeats (*) “HURRY UP
PLEASE ITS TIME.” This poem includes the sections “What the Thunder
Said,” and “A Game of Chess,” and it ends with the word “Shantih”
being repeated three times. For 10 points, name this poem that begins
“April is the Cruelest Month,” a groundbreaking work of T.S. Eliot.
Pyotr Ilyich {Tchaikovsky} This composer wrote a Serenade for Strings
whose first movement is similar in style to Mozart and whose second
movement is written in “Tempo di valse.” This composer included
Serbian folk songs in his Marche Slave [“slav”]. One of this
composer’s ballets has the sorcerer Von Rothbart cast a spell on (*)
Odette to make her turn into a bird at day.  Another of his ballets
includes a Trepak, and the Mouse King dies before the Dance of the
Sugar Plum Fairy and the Waltz of the Flowers is performed.  For 10
points, name the composer of the ballets Swan Lake and The Nutcracker.
{species} Robert T. Paine defined one type of this entity as one whose
impact on its ecosystem is disproportionately large relative to its
abundance, their keystone type. r-selected ones are replaced by
K-selected ones through ecological succession. One type occurs when
they are distributed in a circular pattern geographically and is the
ring type. (*) Peripatric, sympatric and allopatric are all types of a
process that gives rise to new ones. Organisms belonging to the same
one are known as conspecific. For 10 points, name this class of
animals that is capable of interbreeding and producing fertile
offspring, the smallest unit of taxonomic rank. George Bernard {Shaw}
This author created the “Don Juan in Hell” sequence in a play where
Revolutionists’ Handbook author Jack Tanner is engaged to Ann
Whitefield. In one play by this author, Adolphus Cusins becomes heir
to Andrew Undershaft’s weapons factory after agreeing to marry the
title officer of the (*) Salvation Army. In this playwright’s best-
known work, Colonel Pickering bets Henry Higgins about the possibility
of transforming Eliza Doolittle into a high society lady. For 10
points name this Irish playwright of Man and Superman, Major Barbara
and Pygmalion. {two} [accept {plus two} or {two plus}; do not accept
“minus two,” do not accept “two minus”] Oxalate can bind to the
central atom in a coordination complex this many times.  Mesons are
made of this many subparticles.  Tartaric, citric, and carbonic acid
have this many equivalence points.  Tritium contains this many
neutrons in its nucleus.  Alkenes contain this many (*) bonds between
its carbon atoms.  All s orbitals can contain up to this many
electrons.  This is the oxidation number of zinc, and it is the number
of valence electrons in all alkaline earth metals.  For 10 points,
name this number, which is the atomic number of helium. Louis
{Armstrong} One of this artist’s final recordings claimed that “We
Have All the Time in the World.” In St. Louis, he played with Fate
Marable before joining Joe “King” Oliver’s Creole Jazz Band. Barney
Bigard and Jack Teagarden joined this man’s (*) “All-Stars,” organized
by his manager Joe Glaser. One of his songs begins, “I see trees of
green, red roses too/ I see em bloom for me and for you.” Known for
his collaborations with Ella Fitzgerald and scat singing abilities,
this musician’s 1963 hit “Hello, Dolly!” preceded “What a Wonderful
World.” For 10 points, name this American jazz trumpeter, nicknamed
“Satchmo.” {Colorado} River The Roaring Fork, Gunnison, and Green
Rivers are all tributaries of this river, and in the early 20th
century, water from this river helped refill the Salton Sea. Uranium
waste from the Atlas Minerals Corporation forms the Moab Tailings near
this river, and the All-American Canal was built to divert its water
to (*) irrigate nearby Imperial Valley. This river forms the border
between Arizona and California, and Lake Mead was created on it after
the construction of the Hoover Dam. For 10 points, identify this river
in the American Southwest that runs through Grand Junction in its
namesake state, as well as the Grand Canyon. {Execution}s [accept any
and all answers pertaining to {capital punishment} including “getting
shot by a firing squad,” “hanging” or “getting killed by the
government and/or some sort of higher authority”] In a story by Jean-
Paul Sartre, Tom does calisthenics to keep warm while sharing a room
with Pablo Ibbieta, who avoids this event after Gris is arrested. A
Norman Mailer novel details the events surrounding this action being
done upon Gary Gilmore. In The Idiot, a scene at Yepanchin’s house
sees Myshkin recount seeing one of these events in (*) France and
describe how there is no hope in this action. Sydney Carton pretends
to be Charles Darnay in order to save him from this event at the end
of A Tale of Two Cities. For 10 points, name this event which can be
performed by firing squad or guillotine. {Loki} This figure lost an
eating competition to a similarly-named opponent while in the hall of
another figure with this name who ruled the Outyards.  Said to be the
son of Farbauti and Laufey, this figure was imprisoned by being
chained to three rocks with snake (*) venom dripping above him.  This
figure’s wife was Sigyn, but he also had an affair with the giantess
Angraboda.  Although he turned into a female horse and gave birth to
Sleipnir, this deity is the father of Hel, the Midgard Serpent, and
Fenrir.  This figure is bound in chains until Ragnarok due to his role
in causing the death of Baldur.  For 10 points, name this trickster
from Norse myth. {Plessy} v. Ferguson (or Ferguson v. {Plessy}) Henry
Billings Brown wrote the opinion for the 7-1 majority in this Supreme
Court case, and Albion Tourgée served as the plaintiff’s legal
representative. John Marshall Harlan’s dissent concurred with
Tourgée’s (*) 14th Amendment interpretations. This case’s plaintiff
worked for the Committee of Citizens and was arrested for boarding a
whites only railroad car bound for Covington, Louisiana, despite being
one-eighth African-American. For 10 points, name this 1896 Supreme
Court case that affirmed Jim Crow Laws and established the “separate
but equal” doctrine, later overturned by Brown v. Board of Education.
{irrational} numbers [accept {transcendental} numbers before it is
read] A number of the form a to the b, where a is algebraic and not
equal to zero or one and b is algebraic and this kind of number,
yields a number in this set of numbers according to Gelfond's theorem.
This set of numbers include all non-complex transcendental numbers.
The proof that the diagonal of a square is incommensurable proved that
it was this kind of number. These numbers cannot be expressed in the
(*) form a over b, where a and b are integers, and their decimal
expansion never repeats or terminates. For 10 points, name this set of
numbers that includes the golden ratio and the square root of two and
that constitutes the real numbers with the rationals. Joseph Mallord
William {Turner} This artist painted a mass of people in the
foreground next to a white bridge spanning the Thames in The Burning
of the Houses of Lords and Commons. He painted shackled people sinking
as birds swarm in “typhoon” conditions in one work, and in another
depicted the title ship, being (*) “tugged” by a steamship, to be
scrapped.  Another of this painter’s works depicts a train approaching
the viewer as it spans the Maidenhead Railway Bridge.  For 10 points,
name this Romantic landscape painter, who painted The Slave Ship, The
Fighting Temeraire, and Rain, Steam, and Speed. David {Hume} This man
argued against the design argument for God, stating that in order for
it to be feasible, it must be true that order and purpose are observed
only when they result from design, in Dialogues Concerning Natural
Religion. This philosopher also investigated human cognition and
skepticism and divided all (*) perception into ideas and impressions,
and postulated a universal principle accounting for the connections
that bind them together in his most famous work. For 10 points, name
this Scottish philosopher and author of An Enquiry Concerning Human
Understanding. {First} Council of {Nicaea} (prompt on “Council of
Nicaea”) One matter resolved at this event was that of the Meletian
schism. Attendants of this event included the priests Victor and
Vicentius, who were representatives of Pope Sylvester I and assisted
Hosius of Cordova in leading the proceedings, and it banned clergy
from living with (*) women who were not blood relatives. This event
was called in response to the Arians’ rejection of the Trinity, and
this council also saw a resolution to the Easter Controversy and the
establishment of canon law. For 10 points, name this first ecumenical
council convened by Constantine the Great in 325 CE. {WALL-E} This
animated movie was made to appear more "filmed" by using lens
artifacts, such as in one scene where the protagonist is trapped
against a door by several shopping carts. Fred Willard appears in a
live-action role in this film. Minor characters in this film include
GO-4 ["Gopher"], which falls to its death on the Lido Deck, and the
(*) cleaning-focused MO ["Moe”], voiced by sound designer Ben Burtt.
The Axiom starship is one of many structures in this movie built by
the "Buy-N-Large" corporation, which sent the human race into space
after filling Earth with trash--until plant life was found by the
sentient robot probe EVE. For 10 points, name this 2008 Pixar film
which follows the title trash-compacting robot. Federative Republic of
{Brazil} [or Republica Federativa de {Brasil}] One war fought by this
nation against its southern neighbor was the Cisplatine War, and
Giuseppe Garabaldi fought for the Republicans in one rebellion in this
nation, called the War of the Tatters. The Duke of Caxias led this
nation’s forces in one major conflict, and this nation’s independence
was announced in the Cry of the (*) Ipiranga. Before his 1954 suicide,
Getulio Vargas served as the fascist leader of this nation, which did
not emancipate its slaves until the Golden Law of 1889 issued by the
daughter of Dom Pedro II of this nation. Discovered by explorer Pedro
Cabral, for 10 points, name this large South American nation,
originally a colony of Portugal. Stephen {Crane} One short story by
this author begins with a man that has to deal with a drunk Scratchy
Wilson, who puts down his gun when learning that Potter is recently
married. In another story by this author, one of the characters keeps
repeating the phrase “funny they don’t see us.” This author of “The
Bride Comes to Yellow Sky” and “The (*) Open Boat” also wrote a work
in which the title character is left to a life of prostitution by
Pete. In one novel by this author, the tattered soldier bugs Henry
Fleming about the title wound. For 10 points, name this author of
Maggie, A Girl of the Streets and The Red Badge of Courage. A {Doll’s
House} One character in this work, with his syphilitic death imminent,
plans to give another character a calling card marked by a black
cross. The protagonist proclaims at one point in this work that she
has only thirty-one hours to live, coinciding with the end of her (*)
tarantella performance. During this work, the protagonist is accused
by Kristine Linde of accepting money from her husband’s best friend,
Dr. Rank. Set at Christmastime, it is revealed in this play that
Krogstad provided a loan, and he blackmails the protagonist to secure
his job with her husband Torvald. For 10 points, name this play where
Nora Helmer feels like a toy and leaves her husband, a work a of
Henrik Ibsen. {friction} Bowden and Tabor formulated a law for this
force by using asperities. The Stribeck curve is used to categorize
the properties of this force. For metals in a vacuum, this force can
create a "cold weld." The stick-slip phenomenon is due to this force.
One form of this force is also known as the Coloumb type. According to
(*) Amontons' first law, this force is proportional to the normal
force. The coefficient of this force, symbolized mu, is usually higher
for its static form than its kinetic form. This force increases with
the roughness of surfaces. For 10 points, name this force on objects
in contact that opposes motion. {Seneca Falls} Convention At this
event, Thomas McClintock read passages from the writings of Sir
William Blackstone, and shortly after it, one attendee began
publishing a newspaper known as The Lily. Horace Greeley affirmed the
values of this event while writing for the New York Tribune, while
earlier, two of its organizers had been denied participation in the
World (*) Anti-Slavery Convention in London. Held in a Wesleyan
Chapel, this event was attended by Frederick Douglass, and its chief
tenets were espoused in the Declaration of Sentiments. For 10 points,
name this 1848 meeting convened by Lucretia Mott and Elizabeth Cady
Stanton, the birthplace of the Women’s Rights Movement. {Gibbs free
energy} Taking the derivative of this quantity with respect to
particle number yields chemical potential. It can be found by
multiplying the natural log of the equilibrium constant by negative
one, the ideal gas law, and temperature, while it can also be found
through subtracting the product of temperature and entropy from (*)
enthalpy. When this quantity is negative for a given reaction, that
reaction is spontaneous. For 10 points, name this thermodynamic
quantity, which is the amount of usable energy in a system and which
is symbolized capital G. Alexis de {Tocqueville} This thinker and de
Beaumont were fictionalized in Peter Carey’s novel Parrot and Olivier
in America. This man predicted that Russia and the title location of
one of his works would be drawn into inevitable conflict. In that
work, he claimed that slavery would eventually cause violent conflict.
Although that work was initially supposed to study (*) prisons, this
man stressed the importance of America’s ‘Puritan Founding’ and
lamented the ‘omnipotence of the majority’ and isolation that the
title government system created. For 10 points, name this man who
described political practices in the United States in Democracy in
America. Daniel {Defoe} This author wrote, “a man may, in effect, make
a whore of his own wife” while decrying contraception in his essay
“Conjugal Lewdness.” One of this man’s novels is narrated by the
Saddler and recounts three brothers building a house in Epping Forest
during a 1665 event. In another work by him, an English woman born in
(*) Newgate Prison cons and steals her way into high society. Besides
writing Journal of the Plague Year and Moll Flanders, this author
penned a novel whose protagonist escapes Moorish slave-masters with a
boy named Xury and meets his servant Friday on a desert island. For 10
points, name this English novelist who wrote Robinson Crusoe. {black
hole} A method to extract energy from a rotating one of these objects
was proposed by Roger Penrose. These objects are completely
characterized by their mass, charge, and angular momentum according to
the no-hair theorem. They can be formed when a white dwarf exceeds the
Chandrasekhar limit. The radius of these objects is smaller than their
(*) Schwarzschild radius. They emit Hawking radiation, and
supermassive ones are thought to lie at the center of galaxies. For 10
points, name these astronomical bodies with an event horizon, past
which light cannot escape. {Argentina} This nation possesses the Ibera
Natural Reserve in its province of Corrientes, and the Le Maire Strait
separates La Isla de los Estados from its mainland. Its city of
Rosario sits on the Parana River, which ultimately merges into the Rio
(*) de la Plata. Containing half of the spectacular Iguazu Falls and
all of the summit of Aconcagua, this country’s southern half helps
comprise the fertile Pampas, and it splits Patagonia and Tierra del
Fuego with neighbor Chile. For 10 points, identify this second-largest
nation in South America with capital at Buenos Aires, named for its
supposed silver deposits. {Medici}s One member from this family wrote
an epistle to Federigo of Aragon, while another founded the Academia
della Crusca. The publication Sidereus Nuncius was dedicated to this
family by a scientist who exchanged letters with Christina of
Lorraine, a member of this group. This family was the target of the
(*) Pazzi Conspiracy, and in addition to supporting Galileo, this
family produced popes such as Leo X, son of Lorenzo the Magnificent,
and one member helped instigate the St. Bartholomew’s Day Massacre.
For 10 points, name this Italian family which included that French
queen Catherine, a dynasty founded by Cosimo that dominated Florence
during the Renaissance. Jacques-Louis {David} In a patriotic work by
this artist, a man sits with one arm raised as his sons, whom he had
ordered killed, are brought behind him.  This artist of The Lictors
Bring to Brutus the Bodies of His Sons painted a man on horseback
crossing the St. Bernard Pass.  This artist made a sketch of the (*)
Tennis Court Oath and many paintings of Napoleon.  He painted a man,
clutching a paper and quill pen in the bath, who has been stabbed in
the chest.  In another painting, women are crying as a man holds out
three swords to his sons.  For 10 points, identify the French
Revolutionary artist of The Death of Marat and The Oath of the
Horatii. Fidel Alejandro {Castro} Ruz Forces under this man were
targeted by Operation Verano, which failed after this man’s victories
at Santa Clara and Yaguajay at the head of the 26th of July Movement.
Arriving in his home country on the yacht Granma following his exile
after a failed attack on the Moncada barracks, this orator of the (*)
“History will absolve me” speech waged a guerrilla campaign to oust
Fulgencia Batista with the help of Che Guevara. This man’s military
defeated the Bay of Pigs invasion and this leader formed close ties to
the Soviet Union, which led to a US embargo. Recently succeeded by his
brother Raul, for 10 points, name this former dictator of Cuba.
{Quetzalcoatl} This god wounded himself and used the blood to give
life to the current world of man. That blood was put on the bones this
god retrieved from the remains of the fourth world in Mictlan. This
god, the twin of Xolotl, represented the morning star, earning him a
name meaning "lord of the dawn." The god (*) Tezcatlipoca tricked this
god that gave man maize into getting drunk and eventually burning
himself in a fire or sailing away on a raft. For 10 points, name this
deity of the mythology of the Aztecs, depicted as a feathered serpent.
{D} major [do not accept “D minor”] Alexander Scriabin described this
key as yellow or golden.  Both Tchaikovsky’s and Beethoven’s violin
concertos are in this key, and so is a suite from Handel’s Water Music
that contains the Alla Hornpipe.  The “Titan” and “Choral” symphonies
by Mahler and Beethoven, respectively, are also in this key.  This is
the key of the (*) Hallelujah chorus, as well as of Pachelbel’s Canon.
It is equivalent to “re” in solfege and is the relative major of B
minor.  For 10 points, name this key, which contains two sharps in its
key signature. Republic of {France} In February 2012, this nation’s
appointed ambassador to Rwanda was recalled due to their close
relationship with this country’s foreign minister Alain Juppe, who is
supposedly hostile to Rwanda. One former presidential candidate in
this country has recently faced charges of being involved in a
prostitution ring, and the current president of this country is
married to former (*) model Carla Bruni and presided over a government
ban on face coverings in public spaces, including the Muslim burqa.
Home of Dominique Strauss-Kahn, the former head of the IMF charged
with rape in New York City, for 10 points, name this European country
led by Nicholas Sarkozy. {Labour} Party The Fabian Society played a
key role in the development of this political party, and the Zinoviev
letter caused it to take losses in the 1924 elections. One member of
this party established Special Drawing Rights for the IMF and another
penned New Deal for Coal before pushing through the Open (*)
University education system. In addition to James Callaghan and Harold
Wilson, another person from this party instituted the National Health
Service, part of its nation’s welfare state. For 10 points, name this
British party of Clement Attlee, which is supported by trade unions,
and whose recent prime ministers Tony Blair and Gordon Brown. Robert
{Browning } This poet created a character who seeks the title
structure by following a crippled guide to a pair of hills “crouched
like two bulls locked horn in horn,” in “Childe Roland to the Dark
Tower Came.” In another poem, this author exclaims how God said not a
word as the title figure strangles a woman by her hair. In addition to
(*) “Porphyria’s Lover,” this poet describes a woman who “looks as if
she were alive” in a portrait by Fra Pandolf. For 10 points, name this
English poet who wrote about the Duke of Ferrera’s wife in “My Last
Duchess,” the husband of fellow poet Elizabeth Barret. {Moses} This
man made a brass snake and mounted it on the pole, proclaiming that
those who were bitten who looked upon it would not die. This man’s
life is saved in an inn by his wife performing a circumcision. At
Meribah, this man struck a stone instead of speaking to it, causing
(*) water to come forth. However, this incident would be the reason
for why he would not be able to go the Promised Land. This man married
a daughter of Jethro after saving her from attackers at a well. This
man destroyed a golden calf that was made in his absence while he
received a pair of engraved stone tablets. For 10 points, name this
prophet who led the Israelites out of Egypt. {The Sun Also Rises} The
protagonist of this novel has dinner with the prostitute Georgette,
whose advances he turns down. Earlier, that protagonist of this novel
is seen having a drink with Harvey Stone at the Café Select only to
have an unpleasant encounter with Frances Clyne. Bill Gorton
accompanies the protagonist of this novel on a fishing trip and (*)
Pedro Romero sleeps with the central female character at the Montoya
Hotel which leads one character to call the protagonist a pimp and
knock him and the drunken Mike Campbell out. Robert Cohn, Brett
Ashley, and the sterile Jake Barnes, appear in, for 10 points, which
‘lost generation’ novel by Ernest Hemingway. {Donatello} A 1966 flood
damaged one of this artist’s creations, a wooden sculpture of a
weeping Mary Magdelene. This man honored Erasmo da Narni in an
equestrian sculpture of Gattamelata. Sculptures created by this man
for a building in the garden of a monastery in (*) Florence include
depictions of Saint Mark, and one of Saint George holding up a shield.
One work by this artist was the first free-standing nude since
classical civilization, the subject standing with a sword on the head
of a giant he has slain. For 10 points, name this renaissance Italian
artist of a bronze sculpture of David. Geoffrey {Chaucer} This man’s
poems include “Lak of Steadfastness” and “The Former Age.” A poet
reads about Ceyx and Alcyone before dreaming about a knight upset at
losing a game of chess in one work by this man. In addition to The
Book of the Duchess, this writer retells a story of ill-fated (*)
Trojan War lovers in Troilus and Criseyde. One part of his most famous
work is a story of a knight convicted of rape trying to find out what
it is that women want most.  For 10 points, name this medieval English
writer who wrote of the Miller, the Pardoner, and the Wife of Bath in
his Canterbury Tales. {titration} The Karl Fischer variety of this
procedure is used to determine trace amounts of water in a sample, and
EDTA is often used in used when metal ions are involved.
Potentiometric versions of this often involve periodically measuring
the voltage across an analyte solution.  Results of this technique are
often plotted on a namesake (*) curve usually containing a distinct
inflection point, and chemicals such as phenolphthalein are often used
to determine an equivalence point in acid-base ones. For 10 points,
name this lab procedure in which a concentration of an unknown
solution can be found my adding a reagent with known concentration
drop-wise often through a buret. {Zoroastrianism } The dead of this
religion must cross the Chinvat Bridge to enter the afterlife. The
hymns of this religion are collected in the Gathas. According to this
religion, the ovular being Gayomart was the first man, who was slain
by an evil demon.   The uncaring god of time in this religion is (*)
Zurvan. This religion holds fire to be a means of purification.
Corpses of members of this faith are left to be devoured on Towers of
Silence in a "sky burial." This religion believes that the evil
Ahriman is locked in conflict with the god Ahura Mazda. For 10 points,
name this Persian religion considered to be the foundation of
monotheism. {Adele} Laurie Blue Adkins This artist's debut album
included a cover of Bob Dylan's "Make You Feel My Love" and a song
performed on this artist's breakthrough performance on Saturday Night
Live, "Chasing Pavements." This 2009 Grammy winner for Best New Artist
recently released the album (*) 21, where in one song she sings,
"sometimes it lasts in love, but sometimes it hurts instead," and in
another she sings "the scars of your love remind me of us" and "we
could have had it all." For 10 points, name this British soul singer
of "Someone Like You" and "Rolling In The Deep." Yukio {Mishima} or
Kimitake {Hiraoka} In one novel by this author, the attempted rape of
a fisher girl is prevented by the perpetrator being attacked by a
swarm of hornets. That work is titled The Sound of Waves. In another
work by this writer, the son of a Buddhist priest is haunted by a
beautiful structure because of his physical imperfections, such as his
stutter. That desire for beauty leads him to burn down that building.
A cycle of novels by this author sees the young (*) Kiyoaki die
outside the monastery of Satoko, and tells his friend Honda that he
will “meet him beneath the falls” before his death, setting up the
theme of reincarnation. For 10 points, name this Japanese author of
The Temple of the Golden Pavilion and The Sea of Fertility who
committed Seppuku after a failed coup. {Red} Sea The Farasan and
Hanish Islands are archipelagos that lie in the southern part of this
body of water. During the Eocene epoch, this body of water began to
form due to its namesake rift. In December 2011, volcanic activity
created a new member of the Zubair Islands in this sea. Lying on its
western coast are the cities of (*) Massawa and Assab, and this body
of water covers the entire Eritrean coastline. The Bab el Mandeb
strait connects this body of water with the Gulf of Aden to the south,
while the Sinai Peninsula and Gulf of Suez lie to its north. For 10
points, identify this narrow, colorfully-named sea that sits between
northeast Africa and the Arabian peninsula. {circle} The osculating
type of this figure for a curve at point P has the same tangent and
kappa as that curve at that point. The curve that is the solution to
the brachistochrone problem is created using this figure. This figure
has parametric equations x equal to a times cosine of t and y equal to
a sine of t. Rotation of it around a central axis forms a torus. This
figure is a (*) conic section with eccentricity zero and is a specific
case of an ellipse that has equal major and minor axes. For 10 points,
name this figure that consists of all the points on a plane
equidistant from a center point. {Congress of Vienna} One resolution
arrived at in this event was the condemnation of slavery, although
Viscount Castlereagh pushed for its full abolition. Switzerland was
declared neutral at this event, which created a 38-member German
Confederation. This event was followed by the creation of the Holy
Alliance. (*) Talleyrand represented France here, where he managed to
keep most of Continental France intact and restore Louis XVIII to the
throne. Chaired by Prince Klemens von Metternich, this is, for 10
points, what meeting in the namesake Austrian capital that sought to
create a balance of power at the end of the Napoleonic Wars? Henry
{Ford} Men under the instruction of this man’s Service Department were
involved in the Battle of the Overpass in 1927, and he sent a peace
ship to Europe in 1915 to try and end World War I. Starting as an
engineer in the Edison Illuminating Company, in later life this man
used his newspaper, the (*) Dearborn Independent, to publish his anti-
semitic views. One product offered by this man came “in any color you
want, as long as that color is black!” For 10 points, name this
American industrialist who introduced and popularized the assembly
lines and the five dollar workday in the production of automobiles
such as the Model T. {Hudson River} school One member of this art
movement painted a large plume of ash as the titular volcano erupts in
Cotopaxi and another work in which a waterfall can be seen below
mountains of the namesake range in Heart of the Andes.  Another member
of this art movement painted the series The (*) Course of Empire as
well as a work that depicts a certain body of water after a a storm.
This art movement included Frederic Edwin Church as well as the artist
of The Oxbow. For 10 points, identify this American art movement
founded by Thomas Cole, which was known for landscape painting and was
named after a New York waterway. {Odysseus} Palamedes placed this
figure’s son in front of his path when this figure pretended to be
insane in using a plough.   This figure was slain by Telegonus, who
did not recognize this figure as his father.  Eurycleia recognized
this figure after seeing on this figure a (*) scar from a boar hunt.
This man was stranded on Calypso’s island for seven years, and he came
up with the idea of the Trojan Horse.  This father of Telemachus slew
his wife’s suitors after returning to his homeland for the first time
in ten years.  For 10 points, name this husband of Penelope and king
of Ithaca. {Circumnavigating the Globe} [accept anything remotely
close like Sailing Around the World, etc] One mission to accomplish
this feat was codenamed Operation Sandblast and was led by Edward L.
Beach, while the friar Martin Ignacio de Loyola was the first to do
this twice. The second person to accomplish this did so using his
namesake route; that man was Andres de Urdaneta. While undertaking
this feat, (*) Francis Drake established the colony of Nova Albion and
pirated several Spanish vessels before being knighted upon his return,
and the most famous expedition to accomplish this feat saw its captain
replaced by Juan Elcarno after he was killed on the Philippine island
of Cebu. For 10 points, name this feat, first achieved by Ferdinand
Magellan’s crew. {virus}es David Baltimore names a classification
scheme for these organisms and also discovered an enzyme used by one
type of these organisms. A model organism for these organisms was
discovered by Esther Lederberg. The DNA of one of these organisms was
labeled with radioactive phosphorus while their protein coat was
labeled with radioactive sulfur in the (*) Hershey-Chase experiment.
That organism was the T2 phage and that protein coat is their capsid.
Another type of these organisms uses the reverse transcriptase enzyme
to produce DNA from its RNA genome and is their "retro-" type. For 10
points, name these organisms that reproduce inside host cells and
which include HIV. Aleksandr {Solzhenitsyn} One of this author’s last
works deals with the relationship between his countrymen and the Jews,
Two-Hundred Years Together. In one novel by this author, the minor
government official Rusanov is annoyed by Kostoglotov, who writes a
letter to Vera Gangart after leaving the title establishment. In
addition to (*) Cancer Ward, this author also wrote a novel in which
the title member of the 104th Work Squad lays brick and manages an
extra bread ration. For 10 points, name this Soviet author of The
Gulag Archipelago and One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich.
{Australia} Hamilton Hume and William Lovell led one expedition in
this country. Members of the Red Ribbon Rebellion here presented
Charles La Trobe with the Bendigo Petition. Another event in this
nation saw the destruction of the Bentley Hotel and the establishment
of the Ballarat Reform League before miners under Peter Lalor were
defeated. In addition to the Eureka (*) Stockade, this country
witnessed the antics of outlaw Ned Kelly, and a Rum Rebellion against
colonial governor William Bligh. Earlier, James Cook landed at this
country’s Botany Bay and navigated its Great Barrier Reef. For 10
points, name this country with Aboriginal culture, whose largest city
is Sydney. {Brownian motion} This process powers the perpetual motion
machine known as Feynman's ratchet. Langevin derived his namesake
equation to model this process. This process is also known as the
Weiner process. Jean Perrin confirmed the atomic nature of matter and
derived Avogadro's number in his studies of this process. Those
studies also verified the stochastic model of this process described
in one of Einstein's Annus Mirabilis papers. It was discovered when
its namesake observed (*) pollen grains suspended in water. For 10
points, name this random movement of particles suspended in a fluid.
Soren {Kierkegaard } This man referred to the "dizziness of freedom"
in a work in which a man looking over a cliff instinctively feels the
need to jump. This man that wrote The Concept of Anxiety investigated
the possibility of a "teleological suspension of the ethical" in a
work in which the story of the sacrifice of Isaac is retold four
times. This philosopher that wrote Fear (*) and Trembling created a
debate between A and Judge Wilhelm over hedonistic and responsible
lifestyles. For 10 points, name this Danish philosopher that wrote
Either/Or. Theodore{ Dreiser} One of this author’s novels concerns the
title native of Columbus, Ohio who becomes the mistress of Lester Kane
in Chicago. In addition to Jennie Gerhardt, this author wrote an
unfinished trilogy centering on Frank Copperwood and starting with The
Financier. This author’s first novel dealt with the title character’s
move from Wisconsin to Chicago, where she meets (*) George Hurstwood,
while his most well-known work focuses on the murder of Roberta Alden
by the social climber lover of Sondra Finchley, Clyde Griffiths. For
10 points, name this pioneer of naturalism who wrote the novels Sister
Carrie and An American Tragedy. Philip {Glass} After meeting Alan
Ginsberg, this composer composed a chamber opera based off of a verse
from “Howl” and inspired by a reading of “Whichita Vortex Sutra.” In
addition to writing Hydrogen Jukebox, this composer’s score for the
film The Hours snagged him a nomination for an Academy Award.  This
composer included the movements “On the Kuru Field of Justice” and
“Tolstoy Farm” in Act 1 of his opera based on the life of Ghandi,
which is part of his (*) “Portrait Trilogy” along with an opera that
features several “Knee Plays” and rhythmic counting. For 10 points,
name this minimalist composer of the operas Satyagraha and Einstein on
the Beach. {Qing} Dynasty [or {Manchu} Dynasty] T’o Ming and Ma
Hualong led one revolt by Hui Muslims against this dynasty. In
addition to that Dungan revolt, Wu Sangui led the Revolt of the Three
Feudatories against it. Founded by members of the Aisin Gioro clan,
this dynasty’s final ruler was the infant (*) Puyi. The Hundred Days’
Reform of Emperor Guangxu resulted in a coup led by the Empress
Dowager Cixi, and the collapse of this dynasty led to a period of rule
by Warlords, which ended with Sun Yat-sen’s creation of a Chinese
Republic. It dealt with massive Taiping and Boxer rebellions. For 10
points, name this final dynasty of China, named for the ethnic group
that took over from its predecessor, the Ming. Martin {Luther} In a
response to this man, Erasmus wrote that this man’s teachings meant
that accepting his interpretation of the Bible required ignoring all
others. This man claimed that transubstantiation occurred in the
Eucharist at the (*) Marburg Colloquy.  The Diet of Worms granted
anyone who killed this man total impunity after he defended himself
with a speech in which he claimed that “Here I stand, I can do no
other.”  That meeting came after this man responded to the sale of
indulgences on October 31, 1517 with the posting on the door of All
Saint’s Church in Wittenberg of 95 Theses. For 10 points, name this
man who started the Protestant Reformation. William {Faulkner} In this
author’s first novel, a wounded aviator returns to Charlestown to find
his flapper fiancee Cecily dating George Farr. In that novel by this
author, Donald Mahon waits for the title sum of money, goes blind,
marries Margaret Powers and dies. In another novel by this author of
Soldier’s Pay, a trip to Jefferson is supported because  Anse wants
new teeth, Cash wants a ‘graphophone’ and Dewey (*) Dell wants an
abortion, although the central movement of that novel is the Bundrens’
journey from Yoknapatawpha County to bury Addie. For 10 points, name
this Southern stream-of-consciousness author of As I Lay Dying, The
Sound and the Fury and Absalom! Absalom! {pituitary} gland [or
{hypophysis}] This organ is part of an "axis" with the adrenal gland
and hypothalamus. The posterior of this organ releases oxytocin and a
hormone whose secretion is blocked by alcohol, vasopressin, or ADH.
The gondatropins FSH and LH are secreted by this organ. Cushing's
disease results from it releasing too much of a hormone that signals
the adrenal gland to produce (*) cortisol. That hormone is ACTH, which
is secreted from the anterior region of this gland. This gland also
produces endorphins. For 10 points, name this endocrine gland whose
anterior section secrete growth hormone. {Quebec} In 1949, workers in
this province demanded the implementation of the Rand Formula during
the Asbestos Strike. It experienced energy reform with the James Bay
Project. The Charlottetown and Meech Lake Accords were efforts to
reconcile this province with the rest of its country. The death of
James Wolfe occurred in this province during the Battle of the (*)
Plains of Abraham, and a series of social changes took place in the
1960s “Quiet Revolution” under Jean Lesage. A 1995 referendum was
narrowly defeated that would have supported this province’s secession
from Canada. For 10 points, identify this Francophone Canadian
province containing Montreal. Silvio {Berlusconi} [accept {Il
Cavaliere} or {The Knight}(seriously)] An article titled “The man who
screwed an entire country,” caused this man to sue The Economist for
libel. A cable released by Wikileaks stated that this politician was
“the mouthpiece of  Putin in Europe.” This man was accused of having
sex with a Moroccan belly dancer named Ruby Rubacuoui while she was
still a minor, and he has notoriously thrown (*) “bunga bunga parties”
filled with underage prostitutes. Despite promising to give up his
holdings, this politician still controls the company Mediaset and owns
the AC Milan soccer club. Resigning in the midst of an economic crisis
in November 2011, for 10 points, name this controversial former prime
minister of Italy. Frederic {Chopin} Mily Balakirev re-arranged the
second movement of this composer’s Piano Concerto No.1 in E minor for
solo piano.  This composer’s Fantasie-Impromptu begins with a G-sharp
chord followed by a C-Sharp chord.  One of his pieces is, except for
one note, played only on black keys, and another was supposedly based
off the composer watching a dog (*) chasing its tail.  This composer
of the Black Key Etude and the Minute Waltz expanded on the nocturne
and introduced the ballade as a standard type of piece.  For 10
points, name this Polish composer of many etudes, mazurkas, and
polonaises, who wrote many works for the piano. {Horus} An early
description about this deity gives him the epithet Behdety and
describes him as married to Hathor and appearing as a winged sun disc
to fight the opponents of Ra.  This deity won a boat race in which he
painted a wooden boat to make it look like a stone boat.  This god’s
four sons preside over the (*) canopic jars.  This god’s mother
conceived him after resurrecting her husband, who had been killed by
this god’s uncle Set.  Pharaohs were said to be descended from this
god.  For 10 points, name this son of Osiris and Isis, a falcon-headed
Egyptian god. D(avid) H(erbert) {Lawrence} This author wrote a short
story where a young boy wins five thousand pounds for his spendthrift
mother after riding the title conveyance to figure out the results of
a race. This author of “The Rocking-Horse Winner” wrote a novel in
which Baxter Dawes threatens the main character for having an affair
with his wife (*) Clara. In that novel by this author, an intentional
overdose of morphine is given to a cancer-ridden woman by her aspiring
artist son, the protagonist Paul Morel. In another novel by this
author, the wife of Clifford has an affair with a gardener named
Oliver Mellors. For 10 points, name this English novelist of Sons and
Lovers and Lady Chatterley’s Lover. {Rembrandt} (Harmenszoon) van Rijn
This man depicted himself peeking out behind the title character in
red, who is bathed in light while being killed in Jerusalem in The
Stoning of St. Stephen. In one of this man’s works a surgeon in a
wide-brimmed hat dissects the forearm of a criminal in front of seven
men grouped on the left side of the canvas. The lower left side of
another of this man’s works shows a dog barking at a man playing a (*)
drum while on the left side a chicken hangs from the belt of an
illuminated small girl in a gold dress. For 10 points, name this Dutch
artist who painted a medical lecture of Dr. Nicolaes Tulp in the
Anatomy Lesson and Frans Banning Cocq’s militia in The Night Watch.
{East Germany} or {German Democratic Republic} or {GDR} [do not accept
or prompt on Germany] One of this polity’s spies sparked the Guillaume
Affair which led the Prime Minister of a neighboring country to
resign. This polity was divided into fifteen Bezirke during the tenure
of Prime Minister Otto Grotewohl, and it undertook a New Economic
System in 1960 under the leadership of the (*) Walter Ulbricht and the
Socialist Unity Party. A secret police force called the Stasi helped
leaders like Erich Honecker maintain power here. Willy Brandt’s
Ostpolitik tried to establish better relations with this country. For
10 points, name this state which reunified with its western
counterpart in 1990, after the Berlin Wall fell. {Barcelona} The
Llobregat river runs southwest of this city, which features a namesake
pavilion designed by Mies van der Rohe. Resting atop the Tibiado
mountain near this city is the Torre de Cosserola, and some of its
neighborhoods include the Gothic Quarter and El Carmel, which contains
Park (*) Güell. This city includes the Camp Nou soccer stadium and is
home to the unfinished Sagrada Familia cathedral. This city lies to
the south of the Pyrenees along the Mediterranean coast and is the
capital city of Catalonia. For 10 points, identify this second most
populous city in Spain after Madrid, and home to a wildly successful
“Futbol Club.” the {Sun} A yellow emission line in the spectrum of
this object led Norman Lockyer to propose the existence of helium. The
protracted lack of certain features on this object last occurred
during the Maunder Minimum, and those features generally increase and
decrease in an eleven year cycle. The mean distance (*) to this object
from Earth is equal to the astronomical unit, or au. Those previously
mentioned features are this object's namesake spots and a sudden
brightening of it are known as its flares. For 10 points, identify
this star at the center of our solar system that can undergo an
eclipse when the Moon passes in front of it. {Jane Eyre} One character
in this work is asked to forgo studying German in favor of Hindustani,
and this work’s protagonist is taken to the red room as punishment by
servants Miss Abbot and Bessie. This novel opens with the protagonist
reading a “History of British Birds.” A fire believed to be set by (*)
Grace Poole is later revealed to be the work of an insane Bertha
Mason. The protagonist of this work attends the Lowood School, where
she befriends Helen Burns, and later rejects the marriage proposal of
St. John Rivers. For 10 points, identify this novel set in the estates
of Gateshead and Thornfield, in which Edward Rochester marries the
title governess, a work by Charlotte Bronte. Thomas Robert {Malthus}
In one work, this man became the first to describe the demand
schedule. That same work sees him refute Say’s law, claiming gluts can
exist in the short-run, while this man contends rent only exists in
cases of surplus in “An Inquiry into the Nature and Progress of Rent.”
Influential to Alfred Russell Wallace and Charles Darwin, some believe
his theories point to a namesake (*) catastrophe. In his most famous
work, he argues that food production grows arithmetically while
population increases geometrically, as part of his namesake growth
model. For 10 points, name this British economist who wrote “An Essay
on the Principle of Population.” United States Presidential Election
of {1912} In this election, Milwaukee mayor Emil Seidel ran alongside
a Socialist Party candidate running for the fourth time. Eugene Chafin
ran under the Prohibition ticket in this election, in which Champ
Clark of Missouri failed to win the winning party’s nomination. Hiram
Johnson ran on the ticket of the eventual runner-up, who espoused the
ideas of “New (*) Nationalism,” while the winner of this election
supported the self-reliance in “The New Freedom” platform. During the
campaign for this election, John Schrank attempted to assassinate the
“Bull Moose” nominee Teddy Roosevelt. For 10 points, name this
election where Woodrow Wilson defeated incumbent William H. Taft.
{Inferno }[prompt on “Divine Comedy”] In this work’s opening, the
narrator encounters a leopard, a lion, and a she-wolf that force him
into a dark wood. The protagonist of this work is mistaken at one
point for the issuer of the papal bull Unam sanctum. A later scene in
this work sees two men, who are (*) frozen opposite one another
endlessly head butting each other. Another character is continually
bitten by Ugolino. The author’s mentor appears as a man forced to
wander a desert under a rain of fire. The story of Lancelot and
Guinevere is mimicked in this work by Paolo and Francesca da Rimini.
For 10 points, name this first part of Dante Aligheri’s Divine Comedy
in which Virgil leads him through hell. {Hawaii} Walter Murry Gibson
set up a “Mormon Kingdom” in this polity before being excommunicated
and serving as Prime Minister. The Morgan Report found that the
Committee of Safety were not guilty in their overthrow of one
government of this place, which had earlier signed the Bayonet
Constitution. That document had put power in the hands of men such as
(*) Sanford Dole. Bill Clinton signed the Apology Resolution dealing
with this polity, which had earlier been ruled from the Iolani Palace
by rulers such as Liluokalani and Kamehameha I. For 10 points, name
this site of the Pearl Harbor attacks, the 50th US State with capital
at Honolulu. Washington {Irving }[accept Diedrich {Knickerbocker}
before mention] One of this man’s books as advertised as the work of
an old Dutch historian was a satirical account of the title city’s
past. After writing a biography of Christopher Columbus, this man was
inspired to write a collection based on a tour of a Spanish palace.
This man penned a work in which the title character heads into the (*)
Catskills and wakes to find that a portrait of King George III in a
pub has been replaced with one of George Washington. In another story
by this author, a schoolteacher vies for the love of Katrina Van
Tassel before being chased away by the Headless Horseman. For 10
points, name this author of “Rip Van Winkle” and “The Legend of Sleepy
Hollow.” Great {Britain} [or {U}nited {K}ingdom; or {England}] One
composer from this country wrote a work for eight choirs with five
voices each, Spem in Alium.  A composer from this country wrote a
series of variations based on friends on an unknown theme, and a
series of military marches, of which the first is typically referred
to as (*) “Pomp and Circumstance.” Another composer from this country
was inspired by Thomas Tallis as well as by the film Scott of the
Antarctic, and also wrote “The Lark Ascending.” For 10 points, name
this country, home to the composer of Edward Elgar and the composer of
Fantasia on a Theme by Thomas Tallis, Ralph Vaughan Williams.
{nucleus} This structure contains PML bodies and paraspeckles.  The
influenza virus can only replicate while within this structure.  This
organelle’s structure is supported by its lamina.  Transcription
occurs in this organelle, which has a subunit that is the site of
ribosome synthesis. This organelle has a double membrane lined with
(*) pores, the outer one of which is continuous with the rough
endoplasmic reticulum.  Within it is all of the cell’s genetic
material, arranged into filaments called chromatin.  For 10 points,
name this organelle, which is often called the control center of the
cell. Margaret {Atwood} In one novel by this author, one character
plays the trivia game Extinctathon, and later engineers a pandemic
while attending the Watson-Crick Institute. In another novel by this
author, a daughter of a button manufacturer battles with old age while
she reminisces on Port Ticonderoga, interspersed with selections from
the title (*) novel within a novel.  This author of  Oryx and Crake
and The Blind Assassin wrote a novel set in the Republic of Gilead, a
land ruled by a racist, chauvinistic male elite. That work by this
author  is told from the point of view of The Commander’s concubine
Offred. For 10 points, name this Canadian novelist of The Handmaid’s
Tale. Battle of {Waterloo} The bloody battle of Ligny preceded this
battle and kept one side from joining this battle until late
afternoon. Early on, the losing side in this battle became bogged down
trying to take the heavily fortified chateau Hougomont. Later in this
battle, Bernhardt of Saxe-Weimar re-took Papelotte for the victors,
and (*) Michel Ney was ordered to capture La Haye Saint for the
eventual losers. A cavalry charge into Allied squares was unsuccessful
and the Imperial Guard retreated shortly after the arrival of the
Prussians under Gebhard von Blucher.  For 10 points, name this 1815
battle in modern-day Belgium where the Duke of Wellington defeat
Napoleon, ending his Hundred Days. The Great {Depression} [or The{
Dust Bowl}] In one work centered on this event, the artist depicted
the Grudgers and Ricketts families, as well as Allie Mae Burroughs. In
addition to Walker Evans, who captured images of this event on behalf
of the Farm Security Administration, the book You Have Seen Their
Faces was produced during this event by Margaret (*) Burke-White.
Memorably, in one photo from this time period, Florence Owens Thompson
holds a hand to her face as her two children turn away and huddle
behind her shoulders. For 10 points, name this time period best
encapsulated by Dorothea Lange’s Migrant Mother, a 1930s economic
disaster. Lake {Superior} A landform called the Sleeping Giant lies
off the coast of this body of water, and the Apostle Islands are
located here near the Bayfield Peninsula. Two of the longest inflows
of this body of water are the Pic and Saint Louis Rivers. The largest
island in this body of water is the Isle (*) Royal, and its many
shipwrecks include that of the Edmund Fitzgerald. Through the St.
Mary’s River, this lake flows into Lake Huron, and cities on its coast
include Sault St. Marie, Thunder Bay, and Duluth. For 10 points, name
this body of water, the largest of the Great Lakes. Eugene {Ionesco}
This man’s essay Nu assails writers like Tudor Arghezi and Mircea
Eliade, and his Hugoliade satirizes the life and writings of Victor
Hugo. In one work by this writer, an elderly couple commits suicide
after inviting over a series of invisible guests, while in another,
Queens Marie and Marguerite are married to the dying, 400 year-old
ruler of a failing kingdom. Aside from The (*) Chairs and Exit the
King, this dramatist wrote a play about a visit between London
couples, the Martins and the Smiths. In another, Berenger pines for
his co-worker Daisy while Jean changes into the title animal. For 10
points, name this Romanian playwright of The Bald Soprano and
Rhinoceros. {serpent} [or {snake}; reverse prompt if a specific snake
such as “python” is given] After saving two of these creatures,
Melampus gained the ability to understand animals.  A rainbow one of
these shaped the earth in the creation myth of the Aborigines.  In
Norse myth, one of these creatures named Nidhogg lives at the bottom
of the world tree Yggdrasil.  Tiresias changed genders after attacking
(*) two that were mating.  Nagas are half-human and half-this
creature, as is Echidna.  Apollo slew one at Delphi, and one of the
most deadly types of this creature is a basilisk.  For 10 points, name
this animal, which is commonly depicted as eating its own tail and is
a reptile with no legs. {War}(s){ of the Roses} One cause of this
conflict was the Rebellion of Jack Cade, and James Touchet was killed
leading the losing side at the Battle of Blore Heath. Supported by
Charles the Bold, one leader in this war won the Battle of Barnet.
After winning the Second Battle of (*) St. Albans in this war,
Margaret of Anjou and Edmund Beaufort were defeated by Edward IV at
Tewkesbury. This war ended after Henry VII prevailed at Bosworth
Field, where Edward’s brother Richard III was killed. For 10 points,
identify this 15th century English civil war, named for the floral
symbols of the opposing Houses of Lancaster and York. inclusive {or}
[or logical {disjunction}; accept {U} or set {union} before "union" is
read; accept {plus} before it is read] One variant of this logical
operation computes the sum, not the carry out, in half adders and full
adders. A bitwise variant of this logical operation is represented by
a caret in C, is true only when the bits differ, and is the exclusive
type. In C, the bitwise and logical forms of this operation are
represented by a single pipe symbol and two pipe symbols,
respectively. Taking the (*) union of a set is equivalent to this
logical operation. According to De Morgan's laws, the not of the
expression that contains this operation performed on A and B is equal
to not A dot not B. It is often represented by plus. For 10 points,
name this operation that is true if any input is true and is
contrasted with and. Edouard {Manet} In the last composition in a
series by this man, onlookers peek over a wall as six soldiers shoot
the title character, being Death of Maximilian. A black cat stands on
the right of the bed while a servant presents flowers to the title
reclining nude modeled after Titian’s (*) Venus of Urbino in another
work of this man. In addition to Olympia, this man painted a woman
framed by bottles of beer, champagne and a platter of oranges while a
mustachioed man talks to what could be a reflection in A Bar at the
Folies-Bergere. For 10 points, name this French artist who painted a
bather by a forest behind two men dining with a nude woman in The
Luncheon on the Grass. Jean-Paul {Sartre} George Orwell called this
thinker “a bag of wind” and threatened to “give him a good boot” in a
comment on this thinker’s book Anti-Semite and Jew. This philosopher
commented on the négritude movement in an essay called “Black
Orpheus,” and coined the phrase (*) “existence precedes essence” in
the lecture “Existentialism is a Humanism.” He wrote one work in which
three people are locked in a room, and discover that “hell is other
people” but declined the Nobel Prize in Literature won in part for
that play No Exit. For 10 points, name this French philosopher, the
lover of Simone de Beauvoir and author of Being and Nothingness.
Michael {Faraday} This physicist's namesake effect revealed a
connection between optics and electromagnetism and is also known as
magnetically induced circular birefringence. In an experiment named
for him, a charged sphere lowered into an uncharged ice pail induces
an equal and opposite charge on the ice pail. That experiment is the
basis behind his namesake (*) cage. His most well-known law includes a
minus sign as a consequence of induced electric current flowing in
such a direction as to oppose the change that induced it. That law
states that induced emf is equal to the negative time derivative of
magnetic flux. For 10 points, name this physicist who names a law of
induction and the SI unit of capacitance. {Wolverine} [or {Logan}, or
James {Howlett}] This man's son Daken replaced him in the Dark
Avengers, and Laura Kinney is an assassin codenamed X-23 cloned from
the DNA of this character. When teamed with Colossus, this man is
often thrown at enemies as a (*) "Fastball Special." In the past, this
character has taken teammates Kitty Pride and Jubilee under his wing.
In the Fatal Attractions arc, Magneto removed a substance from this
character's body that had been implanted by the Weapon X program. For
10 points, name this member of the X-Men with an adamantium skeleton
that includes six retractable claws. The {Inca}n Empire [or
{Tahuantinsuyo}] Kings of this empire were known as Sapa and one such
ruler was known as the “earth-shaker” and brought this empire to its
greatest extent; that man was Pachacuti. This empire’s downfall came
in the midst of a civil war between Huascar and his brother. Hiram
Bingam discovered one outpost of this empire, and (*) Tupac Amaru was
its last ruler.This empire used a knot system called quipu for
communication. Founded by the legendary Manco Capac, its capital was
at Cuzco. For 10 points, name this civilization and builder of Machu
Picchu based in modern-day Peru, which was conquered by Fransisco
Pizarro. Republic of {South Africa} One playwright from this country
wrote of the pen pal Miss Ethel Lange going to meet a man impersonated
by his brother Morrie. That playwright also wrote a work in which one
of the title characters attempts to write an essay about ballroom
dancing, and tells Sam that “you can’t fly kites on rainy days.”
Novels from this country include a work in which a corpse shows up on
Mehring’s farm, The (*) Conservationist. An author from this country
wrote a novel in which Stephen Kumalo arrives in the city to learn his
son has murdered Arthur Jarvis. For 10 points, name this home of Athol
Fugard, Nadine Gordimer, and Alan Paton, whose works often deal with
apartheid. Burrhus Frederic {Skinner} This man attempted to improve
child rearing by inventing the air crib, and he would would modify
kymographs to develop the cumulative recorder. During World War II,
this thinker received funding to train pigeons to help guide bombs in
the aptly named Project (*) Pigeon. This man clashes with
pyscholinguistic theory in his work Verbal Behavior, and he dismisses
the ethos of individualism in Beyond Freedom and Dignity.  The
developer of radical behaviorism, this thinker studied operant
conditioning with the use of his namesake box. For 10 points name this
behavioral psychologist who discussed cultural engineering and utopian
societies in Walden Two. {Chicago } Outrage over poor removal of snow
led this city to elect Jane Byrne as its first female mayor. The
supposedly fireproof Iroquois Theater in this city burned down five
weeks after its opening. Violence at a 1968 (*) convention in this
city led to the arrest of this city's namesake "Seven." In May of
1884, after August Spies spoke to labor protesters, a bomb thrown at
the police started a riot. One disaster in this site of the Haymarket
Square Riot was legendarily started by a cow belonging to Mrs.
O'Leary. For 10 points, name this "Windy City" devastated by a Great
Fire of 1871 and run for several decades by members of the Daley
family. Anton Pavlovich {Checkhov} In one work by this author, the
death of Grischa prompts his mother to go to Paris out of grief. That
character later meets with her old friend Lophakin who suggests a plan
to eliminate her debts by altering her childhood home. Another work by
this author sees Nina fall in love with the novelist (*) Trigorin, who
in turn loves Irina. Irina’s son had earlier given Nina a token of his
love and stated his intention to die as well if she could not love
him. That character lures Nina and begs her to run away with him, but
she refuses resulting in the suicide of Konstantin Treplev. For 10
points, name this Russian dramatist who penned “The Cherry Orchard”
and “The Seagull.” {surface tension} [or {surface free energy}; prompt
on {cohesion} or {cohesive force}s] This phenomenon is represented by
gamma in an equation relating curvature to the pressure difference due
to this phenomenon. That is the Young-Laplace equation, which explains
how alveoli work. This phenomenon is usually measured in dynes per
centimeter. (*) Surfactants like soap decrease it. Water can climb up
thin tubes in part due to this property in a phenomenon known as
capillary action. Menisci are due to this phenomenon. For 10 points,
name this property of liquids that results in greater intermolecular
attraction at an air-liquid interface and which allows insects to walk
across water. “{Macbeth}” After a prophecy is fulfilled, one figure in
this work asks "can the devil speak true?" That figure is murdered in
an attempt to assassinate his son, and returns during a dinner as a
ghost.  One character in this work sees a vision of a floating (*)
dagger, and that character's speech "Tomorrow, tomorrow, tomorrow" is
inspired by the death of a character who proclaims "out, out damned
spot!" In this play, those characters plot to murder King Duncan after
the rise of the title figure to Thane of Cawdor is predicted by the
Weird Sisters. For 10 points, name this tragedy by William Shakespeare
about the title Scottish king. {Saturn} Water plumes were observed on
a geologically active moon of this planet, which is also probably the
most reflective object in our Solar System. The Great White Spot is
sometimes present on this planet. Prometheus and Pandora are two
shepherd moons around this planet. The least dense planet in the Solar
System, it is less dense than water. Another moon of this planet is
the only satellite known to have a dense (*) atmosphere, which is
composed mainly of nitrogen. The Cassini-Huygens mission is studying
this planet and its largest moon, Titan. For 10 points, name this gas
giant best known for its extensive rings, the sixth planet from the
Sun. Mount {Kilimanjaro} The steepest way to climb this mountain is
nicknamed the “Vodka Route,” and Gillman’s Point lies near its summit.
Barranco Valley is a popular campground for this mountain’s climbers,
and it was once known as “Kaiser Wilhelm’s Peak.” First climbed by
Hans Meyer, this mountain has a feature called the (*) Ash Pit, which
lies in the Reusch Crater. The Machame and Marangu are two routes to
reach its summit at Uhuru Point, which sits in this mountain’s
diminishing ice fields. For 10 points, identify this dormant volcano
in Tanzania, the tallest mountain in Africa. {Caravaggio} [or
Michelangelo {Merisi}] This artist painted himself and Mario Minniti
in a work where one boy plays a lute, The Musicians. He depicted
Minitti again in one version of a work portraying a white-turbaned
woman reading a palm, The Fortune Teller. Another work by this man
portrays a skull lying on a book next to the title saint. In addition
to St. (*)  Jerome Writing, he depicts Christ being recognized by a
man wearing a pilgrim’s shell who extends his arms outward in Supper
at Emmaus.  For 10 points, name this Baroque Italian artist, who used
tenebrism in a work showing Christ pointing to the title man, The
Calling of St. Matthew. Socialist Republic of {Vietnam} One dynasty to
rule this country was founded by Lai Thai Tho and fought a war with
the Song dynasty. In addition to the Le dynasty, one kingdom in this
country had its capital at Vijaya and was known as the Champa. One
emperor of this country signed the Treaty of Hue as the last
independent ruler of the (*) Nguyen Dynasty, Tu Duc. One Buddhist monk
in this nation underwent self- immolation to protest the policies of
the Catholic President Ngo Dinh Diem. The Battle of Dien Bien Phu
ended French colonial rule of this Southeast Asian country unified
under the communist rule of Ho Chi Minh. For 10 points, identify the
nation that defeated the United States in a namesake war. getting
{struck} by a {lightning} bolt [accept equivalents; prompt on any
answer that involves getting killed by Zeus but is not specific] This
event occurred to Capaneus, one of the Seven Against Thebes, while he
was standing on a ladder.  This event also happened to Salmoneus after
he attempted to mimic the figure who is usually the source of this.
After one of Apollo’s sons suffered this fate, Apollo retaliated in
anger and was sentenced to help build the walls of Troy.  This event
resulted in the death of (*) Asclepius, while Phaethon suffered this
fate after he lost control of Helios’ chariot.  For 10 points, name
this fate, in which Zeus slew wicked people using his trademark
weapon. {Strauss} One composer with this last name wrote tone poems
about a man reflecting on his life at his deathbed, and about the
pranks and execution of the title character.  In addition to that
composer of Death and Transfiguration and Till Eulenspeigel, one
composer with this name is most well-known today for the (*) Radetsky
March.  That man was the father of a composer who would write Tales
from the Vienna Woods.  For 10 points, name this last name shared by
the composer of Also Sprach Zarathustra and the composer of many
waltzes such as The Blue Danube. {Detroit }Tigers [or Detroit
{Tigers}] This team won a 2011 Divisional Series against the Yankees
despite having a start by its ace rained out in game one. That pitcher
had gone 24-5 for this team during the regular season, including no-
hitting the Blue Jays on May 7th. In 2003, this team lost (*) 119
games but won five of their last six games to avoid breaking the Major
League record for most losses in a season. In January 2012, this team
gave a nine year contract to Prince Fielder.  For 10 points, name this
team that fields reigning AL Cy Young winner Justin Verlander and
plays its games in Comerica Park. {George III} [prompt on {George}]
This monarch diminished the power of Thomas Pelham-Holles in favor of
his trusted adviser, the Earl of Blute. During this monarch’s reign,
Prime Minister Spenser Perceval was assassinated and England agreed to
the Peace of Amiens. This husband of Queen Charlotte defeated an
attempt to reform the (*) East India Company, which aided the rise of
William Pitt, the Younger. His rule saw the passage of the Stamp Act,
and this British king’s later life was marked by fits of madness,
attributable, by some, to porphyria. For 10 points, name this British
king who lost the American colonies and saw his rule end in the
regency of his son, George IV. Alfred {Hitchcock} [accept {Family
Plot} before "this man" is read] Blanche Tyler searches for a missing
heir for $10,000 in this man’s final work, Family Plot, while lovers
Brandon Shaw and Phillip Morgan were the students of Rupert Cadell in
this man’s Rope. In another work, Lars Thorwald is seen murdering his
wife by wheelchair-bound photographer Jeff Jeffries, played by (*)
Jimmy Stewart. In addition to Rear Window, this man, notable for his
brief cameos, made a film that sees Kim Novak’s Judy Barton fall from
the Mission San Juan Baustista bell tower. In one horror film by this
director, Marion Crane is stabbed to death in the shower by Norman
Bates. For 10 points, name this filmmaker who directed Vertigo and
Psycho. Chinua {Achebe} This author gave a lecture at the University
of Massachusetts in which he questioned whether a “novel which …
depersonalizes a portion of the human race” can be called a great work
of art. When published, that lecture by this man was subtitled “Racism
in Conrad’s Heart of Darkness.” One of his characters, who goes away
to college in Britain and is convicted of bribery, is (*) Obi, the
protagonist of No Longer at Ease. In another novel by this writer,
Obi’s grandfather disturbs the “Week of Peace” by beating one of his
wives and hangs himself after he kills a white man.  For 10 points,
name this Nigerian author who wrote about Okonkwo’s family in Things
Fall Apart. {Baha'i} Faith One major text of this religion contains a
section called the “Tablet of the True Seeker,” which describes
prerequisites for spiritual growth in this religion. In addition to
that work, this religion, which utilizes nineteen 19-day months in its
calendar, also uses a text written by this religion’s founder which
describes states such as The Valley of True Poverty and Absolute
Nothingness that a seeker of truth in this religion can reach; that
work is the (*) Seven Valleys. This religion venerates “Manifestations
of God,” including Jesus and Allah, and is governed from the Universal
House of Justice in Haifa. For 10 points, name this religion founded
by Baha'u'llah. The{ Scarlet Letter} In one scene in this novel, the
protagonist visits the home of Governor Bellingham and is horrified at
the reflection in a suit of armor. Mistress Hobbins accuses the
protagonist of this novel of visiting the “Black Man,” and while
delivering some embroidered gloves, the protagonist’s daughter is
called a (*) “demon-child.” That daughter has natural compassion for
Reverend Dimmsdale, who is treated by Roger Chillingworth, the
protagonist’s old husband. For 10 points, name this work set in
Puritan Boston in which an act of adultery produces Pearl and forces
Hester Prynne to wear the title piece of cloth on her chest, an early
American novel by Nathaniel Hawthorne. {red blood cell}s [or
{erythrocyte}s before it is mentioned] The formation of these cells is
stimulated by the release of EPO hormone by the kidney. These cells
can be arranged in the rouleaux formation, in which they are stacked
on top of one another. These cells contain the enzyme carbonic
anhydrase. They originated from reticulocytes that lost their
organelles. Also called (*) erythrocytes, these cells are found in
lower amounts in anemia. These cells lack a nucleus and their color
comes from a molecule that contains an iron atom. For 10 points, name
these blood cells which contain hemoglobin and transport oxygen
throughout the body. Edwin {Drood} His watch and tie pin are
discovered in the river by Mr. Crisparkle. He is an apprentice
engineer who always returns to Cloisterham, and his disappearance is
blamed on Neville Landless, but there is no proof of his death. Uncle
Jasper relentlessly hounds Neville and pursues the title character’s
ex-fiancée Rosa Bud, but is thwarted by the mysterious Mr. Datchery,
who some theorize might be the title character in mufti. For ten
points, name this subject of an unfinished mystery by Charles Dickens.
{sociobiology} Kenneth Bock in Human Nature and History claimed that
this concept rests upon an inherently flawed analogy. Pierre van den
Berghe is a proponent of using it to study kinship. Suggested as the
means by which ethics would be moved out of the field of philosophy,
it denies the possibility of altruism, instead suggesting that parents
protect their offspring in order to protect their genes. For ten
points, name this study of the biological basis of human behavior
founded by Edward O. Wilson. {amine}s (do not accept “azides” or
“amides”) They can be classified as primary, secondary, or tertiary by
shaking them with benzenesulfonyl chloride in the presence of aqueous
potassium hydroxide in the Hinsberg test. Perhaps the most important
organic compounds that can turn litmus blue, they can be formed by the
Curtius rearrangement of acyl azides. The sulfa drugs consist of
substituted ones, while the most important form of this class of
compounds is the benzene derivative aniline. For ten points, name
these compounds in which one or more alkyl or aryl groups are attached
to nitrogen. {Anaximander} According to Aelian, he was the leader of
the colony at Ampipholis. Considered a forerunner of evolutionary
theory due to his belief that mankind may have come from a possibly
aquatic species, he is also said to have invented the sundial. For ten
points, name this student of Thales, who posited that the first
principle was an unlimited, or boundless, mass which he called
apeiron. Alexander Sergeyevich {Pushkin} His life included a season
called the Boldino Fall, in which a cholera epidemic at his family's
estate of Boldino became the occasion for a creative burst whose
output included the verse drama cycle The Little Tragedies and the
short stories of The Tales of Belkin. Killed due to wounds received in
a duel with Baron George d'Anthes, his long poems include Poltava and
The Bronze Horseman. For ten points, name this Russian author of The
Queen of Spades, Ruslan and Ludmilla and Eugene Onegin. (Louis-)
Hector {Berlioz} His Corsair Overture was inspired by James Fennimore
Cooper’s The Red Rover. Other literary musical works include the
Shakespeare-inspired Béatrice et Bénédict, the Sir Walter Scott-
inspired Waverly Overture, the Byron- inspired Harold en Italie, and
an opera based on part of the Aeneid, Les Troyens. For ten points,
name this composer of the choral symphony Romeo et Juliette and the
dramatic work The Damnation of Faust whose “March to the Scaffold” is
the fourth movement of his Harriet Smithson-inspired Symphonie
Fantastique. {Fourth Lateran} Council It mostly ended trial by combat
by forbidding priests to officiate at such events. It mandated yearly
confessions for Catholics and distinctive dress for Jews and Muslims,
while ordering Christian rulers to observe a four-year truce in
preparation for what would become the Fifth Crusade. It also
authoritatively defined the sacraments and promulgated the dogma of
transubstantiation. For ten points, name this 1215 ecumenical council
called by Innocent III. {ELISA} or {enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay}
or {EIA} The sandwich type uses antibodies specific for different
epitopes, while the indirect variety is the preferred method in
detecting serum antibodies against HIV. Horseradish peroxidase and
alkaline phosphatase are among the substances that can be used in this
process, in which a colored reaction product is created by reacting a
colorless substrate and an antibody. For ten points, name this
technique that is similar to, but safer and cheaper than,
radioimmunoassay and which uses an enzyme instead of a radioactive
label. {Baltic} Sea This body of water contains the islands Saaremaa
[SAHR-eh-mah] and Aland. It drains out through the Great and Little
Belts and the Oresund [OE-reh-sun], both of which connect to its
westernmost part, the Kiel Bight. Rivers that flow into it include the
Ücker, Neman, Narva, Neva, and Vistula. The Gulfs of Bothnia and
Finland are arms of, for ten points, what brackish sea between
mainland Europe and the Scandinavian Peninsula? Gerhart {Hauptmann} He
gave up his early sculpting aspirations to produce the romantic epic
The Lot of the Promethides. Some of this dramatist’s minor works
include The Beaver Coat and the verse play The Sunken Bell. The basis
for the character of Mynheer Peepercorn in The Magic Mountain by
Thomas Mann, his other works include the Atrides Tetralogy, Before
Dawn, Hannele, and Drayman Henschel. For ten points, name this German
dramatist and 1912 Nobel laureate who described a Silesian revolt in
The Weavers. The {Norns} A man named Gest gained long life because one
of this cadre prophesied that he would last as long as the candle by
his cradle, after which another of them put out the candle to keep it
from burning down. They are subservient to the wishes of Orlog, the
eternal law of the universe. Another tale says they were also
guardians who let only Idun pass to harvest the youth-giving apples,
although more commonly they are said to live by the spring Urdarbrunn,
which lies under one of the roots of the world-tree Yggdrasil. Urd,
Verdandi, and Skuld are, for ten points, what trio, the Norse
equivalent of the Fates? {Rigel} The Witch Head nebula is illuminated
by light reflected from this Class B star, which some speculate may
become an oxygen-neon white dwarf. Now brighter than the alpha star of
its constellation, it has at least two companion stars and is perhaps
the best example of a blue supergiant. Its name from Arabic calls it
the left foot of its constellation, while its location can be
interpreted as where Scorpio did its stinging. For ten points, name
this star in Orion which is not Betelgeuse. José Clemente {Orozco}
Despite losing the use of both an eye and his left hand in a chemical
accident at school, he successfully pursued a career in art. Called
the Goya of his country for his interest in portraying the horrors of
war, his works include Threat of the Dive Bomber and depictions of
both Lenin and Mohandas Gandhi for the New School for Social Research.
His last completed works were frescoes for the dome of the
legislature’s chambers in Guadalajara. For ten points, name this man
credited for starting a renaissance in Mexican mural painting along
with Diego Rivera and David Siqueiros. Lazzaro {Spallanzani} He
specifically aimed to disprove the English priest John Tuberville
Needham. He showed that different digestive juices were specialized
for different foods, transplanted the head of one snail onto the body
of another, and was the first to artificially inseminate a dog. The
most famous experiment of this professor of physics at Modena and
Pavia involved increased levels of heating and sealing broth in
flasks. For ten points, name this Italian whose experiments helped
disprove spontaneous generation. {Parnassian} poets or Les
{Parnassiens} This literary movement inspired the paintings of Pierre-
Cécile Puvis de Chavannes. Drawing their name from their journal
published from 1866 to 1876, and their aesthetics from Gautier’s
concept of “art for art’s sake,” they preferred technically precise
forms and Greco-Roman history as a subject. Members included José
María Heredia, Théodore de Banville, François Coppée, Sully Prudhomme,
a young Paul Verlaine, and their leader Charles Leconte de Lisle. For
ten points, name this group of French poets who inspired the
Symbolists and whose name ultimately derives from a mythological
mountain. Sunni {Ali} His practice of conducting all five daily
prayers in one sitting and his execution of Islamic clerics and
scholars led Muslim historians to call him “The Celebrated Infidel.”
Although he was able to take the port of Djenne with his well-
developed river navy, he was unable to defeat Mossi. Possibly murdered
by Muhammad Ture, he was ruler of Gao when Timbuktu asked for his help
and he decided to conquer the city instead. For ten points, name this
ruler who defeated Mali, founding the Songhai Empire. {Maud Muller}
The title character is raking hay, nursing “a wish that she hardly
dared to own, for something better than she had known” when the local
judge rides by on his horse. She offers him a glass of water and they
fall to pleasant conversation. She dreams that "he would dress me up
in silks so fine, and praise and toast me at his wine.” Much later, we
learn that “she wedded a man unlearned and poor, and many children
played round her door,” even though she still longs for her lost
opportunity. For ten points, “the saddest words of tongue or pen” are
simply: “It might have been” in this John Whittier poem. {Energy} Its
expectation value given by the Hamiltonian operator in quantum
mechanics, it is the eigenvalue in H-hat psi equals E psi, a fact
which makes it a conserved quantity.  Divided by h-bar, it gives the
frequency of the time-dependent Schrodinger equation and the change in
it, multiplied by delta t, must be greater than or equal to one half
h-bar, according to the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle.  For ten
points, what is this scalar quantity equal to m c squared? Victor
Marie {Hugo} He wrote the poem “Tomorrow, at Dawn” to commemorate the
burial of his daughter Léopoldine. While in exile on the island of
Guernsey, he cranked out "Punishments" and the epic poem The Legend of
the Centuries. A member of the literary group known as the Cénacle, he
had a strange relationship with his editor Charles Nodier, who first
noticed this man’s talent after reading Hans of Iceland. For ten
points, name this author of Ruy Blas, Hernani, Le Roi S'Amuse and The
Hunchback of Notre Dame. Newton’s {Third Law of Motion} It was first
suggested by John Wallis in 1668 as the law of conservation of
momentum. It accounts for the pain in your fist after you hit
someone’s face and makes clear that no self-generated forces exist. It
says two objects interacting with each other must exert forces on each
other and the size of the forces will be the same and diametrically
opposed. One example is a road pushing a car’s wheels forward after
the wheels shove it backwards. For ten points, name this physical law
stating: For every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction.
Florence {Nightingale} On February 7, 1837, she believed that she had
heard the voice of God informing her of her mission, but she had
neglected to hear what that mission was. 70 years later, she would
become the first woman to receive the Order of Merit. Training at
Kaiserwerth and starting out at “a little molehill” in London, she got
her big break from War Secretary Sidney Herbert. Establishing herself
at Scutari, for ten points, this nurse cut disease rates from 50 to 2
percent during her tenure in the Crimean War, earning herself the
nickname “Lady of the Lamp.” Claudio {Monteverdi} After studying with
Ingegneri, he set Tasso’s “Behold the Murmuring Sea” to music,
foreshadowing his future career. Critical attacks on him by the
Bolognese theorist Artusi only strengthened his career. His comic
opera Licoris Who Feigned Madness is lost, as is most of his
L’Arianna, save the famous “Lamento,” which serves as the first great
example of operatic scena. For ten points, name this composer of The
Fight of Tancredi and Clorinda, The Coronation of Poppea and Orfeo.
{Americium} Having valence configuration 7 s 2, 5 f 7 it was the
fourth transuranium element created, even though it is only the third
element after uranium. First created by Glenn T. Seaborg and others it
is a strong alpha and gamma emitter, which is essential to its use in
smoke detectors.  For ten points, which Actinide has 95 protons and is
named after the continent of its discovery to parallel Europium above
it in the Lanthanide series? {Desdemona} She is called "the sweetest
innocent that e'er did lift up eye." Her uncle Gratiano is suspicious
of her marriage but comes to accept it as does her father Brabanto.
This "most fresh & delicate creature" remains "chaste & heavenly true"
despite the rumors that Emilia & Bianca fail to disprove in time. For
ten points, name this Venetian killed when the "green-eyed monster"
Iago convinces her husband that she has slept with Cassio, the wife of
Othello. Ronald {Reagan} In 1977, one elector in Washington decided
that since Gerald Ford wasn’t going to win the election, she would
vote for whoever she chose. Thus, one of the minor footnotes in
history is that this man received one electoral without ever receiving
a single popular vote. For ten points, name this “Great Communicator”
who, despite his odd showing in the 1976 election, would go on to win
the 1980 and ’84 ones. {Rastafarianism} They accept some parts of the
bible as holy scripture, but as a whole, reject it in favor of the
Holy Piby. During their ceremonies, they seek to “chant down Babylon,”
representative of the social and political structure which keeps them
down. Drawing their influences from the works of Marcus Garvey, the
group’s first goal was to unite all black people with the homeland of
Africa. It didn’t really gain ground until the titular prince was
crowned Emperor of Ethiopia, even though he didn’t belong to the
religion himself. For ten points, name this religion closely
associated with reggae and pot. {Prions} First identified by Stanley
B. Prusiner, these agents cause such diseases as Gertsmann-Sträussler-
Scheinker disease, fatal familial insomnia, and kuru. Diseases caused
by these agents involve post mortems showing brain tissue with large
vacuoles in cerebellum and cortex tissue.  Scrapie in sheep, chronic
wasting disease in elk and mule deer and bovine spongiform
encephalopathy or mad-cow disease are all caused by these agents.  For
ten points, these infectious proteins are the cause of Creutzfeld-
Jacob Disease, the human equivalent of mad-cow disease.
{Schizophrenia} Freud thought it resulted from oral fixation. It must
have a genetic component because its concordance rate in twins is 60%
and it is found in 35% of those whose parents both suffer. It may be
caused by cerebral malfunctioning when key RNA molecules are missing
as GABA forms and sufferers have impaired frontal lobes and other
abnormalities. The residual type causes mild eccentricity, but the
disorganized sort creates total incoherence. More familiar are the
stupor of the catatonic kind and the delusions of the paranoid
variety. For ten points, name this disorder in which reality testing
fails and social and intellectual functioning break down. The {Battle
of Jutland} (also accept {Battle of the Skagerrak}) Around 4 PM on May
31, a scouting party of battle cruisers under Admiral Beatty engaged
the High Seas Fleet under Admiral Scheer.  After suffering heavy
losses, the British turned back towards its main fleet, which also
joined the conflict around 6 PM.  British ships were able to block the
retreat of the German fleet, but turned back again in face of German
torpedoes and allowed the German fleet to reach port.  For ten points,
name this indecisive 1916 naval battle of World War I fought in the
North Sea that was claimed as a victory by both sides. The {Possessed}
The protagonist accepts the love of Lizaveta Nikolayevna without
returning it, and proceeds to marry the cripple Marya Timofeyevna on a
whim. He imposes his beliefs on Shatov and Kirilov without truly
believing them himself. All of these men are forced to deal with a man
whose father lives in retirement on Varvara Petrovna’s estate. That
man, inspired by Sergey Nechayev, attempts to have Shatov murdered,
and wants the protagonist, Stavrogin, to act as figurehead for the
group. For ten points, this extremely violent novel about Verkhovensky
and his nihilist underlings was written by Dostoevsky. Gene {Krupa} A
Chicago native, he started in music with a job at Brown Music Company,
and chose to learn the cheapest possible instrument. In 1921, he
joined The Frivolians, but switched to The Austin High Gang with the
help of a $50 bribe. From there, he went on to work with Eddie Condon,
Red Nichols, and Benny Goodman, becoming internationally known for his
technical skill and showmanship. In addition to his jazz work, he made
serious studies of percussion in African and other cultures. For ten
points, name this drummer who collaborated with Benny Goodman on "Sing
Sing Sing." {Hess}'s Law It is important in processes involving coal
or coke where knowledge about heat of reactions is essential. Based on
the fact that mass and energy are conserved in chemical reactions, it
allows enthalpy change to be found for reactions that can't be
measured easily. For ten points, name this principle stating that if a
reaction is the sum of two or more other reactions, the enthalpy
change for the overall process is the sum of the enthalpy changes for
the constituent reactions. The {Molly Maguires} They traced their
origins to the Whiteboys, an 18th century group of terrorists who wore
blackface and white sheets, and attributed their proclamations to
“Ghostly Sally.” They were infiltrated by the private detective James
McParlan, whose testimony in trials from 1875-77 led to the hanging of
ten men for murder. Supposedly fronted by the Ancient Order of
Hibernians, they were blamed for acts of sabotage and assassination
carried out against coal companies in Pennsylvania and West Virginia.
For ten points, identify this secret Irish-American terrorist
organization, named after a widowed agitator. The {Monkees} ’3”
English jockey. They were the “4 insane boys, aged 17-21” required by
Robert Rafelson and Bert Schneider’s Daily Variety ad. They slept in
one huge bed, romped through haunted houses and toy factories and sang
two or three songs a show, including their first single, “Last Train
to Clarksville.” For ten points, name this 1960s television quartet
composed of Peter Tork, Mike Nesmith, David Jones and Mickey Dolenz.
{Sappho } Probably orphaned at age six, this lyric poet went into
exile in Sicily thanks to the political activities of a close
relative, Cercolas of Andros. More than 10,000 lines of varied form
and complex meters have been left behind, possibly bolstered by
collaborations with Alcaeus, but among all the fragments in this
massive body of work, only one complete poem exists today. For ten
points, name this 7th century BCE Lesbian who legendarily flung
herself into the sea when rejected by Phaon, and whose best-known
work, “fragment 31,” was translated by Catullus nearly 500 years after
her death. Marc {Chagall} He designed sets and costumes at Moscow’s
Kamerny Theater and for his friend Sholem Aleichem. His later work was
very dark, influenced by the Holocaust, as seen in Yellow Crucifixion,
and by the death of his wife, as seen in works like Around Her and The
Wedding Candles. For ten points, name this artist from Vitebsk who is
perhaps best known for his depictions of traditional Jewish village
life in paintings such as The Fiddler and I and the Village. {The
Neverending Story} After being chased by bullies, the main character
runs into an old bookstore, where he finds a book, or rather, the book
finds him. Bastian Balthizar Bux takes the book home and is
transported to a magical world, Fantastica, where dreams become
reality, and where he must save the empress by giving her a new name.
For ten points, name this fantasy story written by Michael Ende and
made into a movie with two sequels, and according to Lionel Hutz, the
subject of a landmark false-advertising case. {Faraday}’s law This law
was never actually written in its familiar form by its discoverer, who
did not use calculus in his description of this result. As a
mathematical equation, it states that the electromotive force is equal
to the negative time-derivative of the magnetic flux. In a real
example, the flux could be caused by moving a magnet through a coil of
wire. For ten points, name this law of inductance discovered by the
man who lent his name to the SI unit for capacitance. {Shahnameh} The
work, composed in either the 10th or 11th century, celebrates the
ancient culture of its nation even as that culture, symbolized by the
dihqan, or minor landowner, is slipping into oblivion following the
Arab conquest. Famous for such heroes as Rostam and Esfandiyar, it is
replete with tales of derring-do. For ten points, name this national
epic of Persia, composed by Ferdowsi, which traces the lineage of
Iran's kings back to the mythic past. {Wings} Notable points of this
movie are the scene where the female lead disguises herself as a
Parisian floozy and shows some skin, as well as the sketchy comic
relief of El Brendel in the role of Patrick O’Brien. It details the
troubled relationship between Jack Powell and David Armstrong, who are
both in love with the nurse Mary Preston. In a dogfight with the
Germans, Powell accidentally shoots down Arlen, and is reunited with
Mary. Released in 1927, for ten points, this film starring Buddy
Rogers and Clara Bow was the first winner of the Academy Award for
best picture. {Hind Swaraj} or Indian {Home Rule} Gokhale, head of the
moderate faction of the Indian National Congress, described this book
as "the work of a fool". Nevertheless, the author would lead India to
independence where a previous generation of nationalist leaders
failed. This book, one of his earliest works, written in Gujarati,
shapes itself as a dialogue between the Editor and the Reader, and
outlines ideas for an independent India, as well as the author’s
philosophy of satyagraha. FTP, name this work, whose title in English
translates into what Mohandas Gandhi demanded for India from the
British. {hyperbolic} A linear second-order partial differential
equation of this type is one whose coefficients have a negative
discriminant. Though it does not denote Riemannian geometry, it can
denote Lobachevsky-Bolyai-Gauss geometry, and in it, the three angles
of a triangle add up to less than 180 degrees. To find this type of
sine or cosine, take half the sum or difference, respectively, of the
exponential function and its reciprocal. For ten points, name this
mathematical adjective, which can also describe conic sections which
are neither elliptic nor parabolic. {Eight Ball} Boy meets girl. Boy
leaves girl on sidewalk after finding her face less attractive than
her butt. Boy robs store after being denied the titular beverage. He
wins another girl’s heart by insulting her and then beating her
offended boyfriend. So goes another day for our hero, Eric “Eazy-E”
Wright. Appearing on both of NWA’s first two albums, for ten points,
name this seminal work of gangsta rap, also a street name for the Olde
English 800 malt liquor which fuels Eazy‘s rampage. Samuel Dashiell
{Hammett} Under the pseudonym Peter Collinson, he published the short
story Black Mask before joining the Baltimore office of the Pinkerton
Detective Agency. An attempt at an autobiography remains in the story
“Tulip” from the collection The Big Knockover. He drew on his
detective experience to write such mystery stories as Roadhouse Nights
and Red Harvest. For ten points, name this founder of “hard-boiled
fiction,” who created Nick Charles in The Thin Man and Sam Spade in
The Maltese Falcon. {Panchen Lama } Dating back to the 17th century,
this position was first held by Lobsang Choekyi Gyalsten. The title is
comprised of Sanskrit and Tibetan words meaning "great scholar." At
14, the current and 11th of these is thought to be the world's
youngest political prisoner. For ten points, name this practitioner of
Mahayana Buddhism, the chief spiritual adviser of the Dalai Lama, and
the second-highest lama in the Tibetan Buddhist hierarchy. {Sleeping
sickness} or {African trypanosomiasis} A telltale symptom of this
disease consists of swollen lymph nodes at the back of the neck, a
condition known as Winterbottom’s sign. Pentamidine, eflorithine, and
especially suramin are used to combat this disease caused by the
parasite Trypanosoma brucei. Death from toxemia is usually the result
of the more severe Rhodesian type, whereas the Gambian type causes
chorea, spastic paralysis, a weary, shuffling gate, and the namesake
occurrence when walking or eating meals. For ten points, name this
disease transmitted by the bite of the tsetse fly. The {School of
Athens} In the room containing it, the other three walls are decorated
by Parnassus, Cardinal Virtues, and Disputa. It was commissioned by
Pope Julius II as part of the Stanza della Signatura, the library of
his apartment. The architecture depicted in it was derived almost
entirely from Bramante, and hence, Bramante’s face appears on a man
giving a mathematical demonstration. The central figures hold up the
Timaeus and Ethics, and completely ignore Diogenes, who lies at their
feet. For ten points, Plato and Aristotle are at the center of this
Raphael fresco representing a compendium of philosophers. George
{Berkeley} In 1734, he attacked those who were less willing to accept
God’s existence than that of “the ghosts of departed quantities.” By
those “ghosts”, he meant the derivatives and infinitesimals of
calculus, which he criticized in his The Analyst, or a Discourse
Addressed to an Infidel Mathematician. His other works, such as
Alciphron or the Minute Philosopher, rejected the existence of
material substance and abstract ideas in favor of perception and
spiritual substance. For ten points, name this author of Three
Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous, a former bishop of Cloyne,
Ireland. {Finnegans Wake } The story was based on Giambattista Vico’s
“Scienzia Nuova,” and Giordano Bruno’s theory of the nature of
opposites is represented in the main character’s sons Jerry and Kevin,
or Shem the Penman and Shaun the Postman. The main character
apparently accosted someone in Phoenix Park, and is tortured by
reminiscences of this event summoned up by the Ballad of Persse
O’Reilly. The main character’s initials are found everywhere in the
novel, in such phrases as Haveth Childer Everywhere. For ten points,
the family of Anna Livia Plurabelle and Humphrey Chimpen Earwicker are
the ostensible subject of this dumbfounding tome, set in Dublin, James
Joyce's last novel. {giant squid} (accept {Architeuthis} before
mentioned) The axons of this animal, whose subspecies include dux and
clarkei, have been measured to be one-tenth of an inch thick.
Conjectures about it have been drawn from beached or netted specimens
and from circular scars on the bodies of sperm whales, but it still
holds true that never has a specimen been seen alive. The first to
describe it was Bishop Erik Pontoppidan, whose 1755 Natural History of
Norway equated it with a giant sea-snake, the kraken. For ten points,
name this animal of genus Architeuthis, the world’s largest
invertebrate. (Paul-)Michel {Foucault} He praised the pleasures of S &
M and the bathhouse, and scandalized the French when he declared his
favorite meal to be “a good club sandwich with a Coke.” He died of
AIDS-related septicemia in 1984, having completed only three of the
six volumes of his History of Sexuality. He isolated four essential
tropes of resemblance, namely convenientia, aemelatio, analogy, and
sympathy, in an attempt to equate human sciences with the concept of
“man” in his The Order of Things. For ten points, name this French
philosopher and originator of the archaeology of knowledge, the author
of  Discipline and Punish and Madness and Civilization. John Foster
{Dulles} He initiated the 1954-55 founding of both SEATO and CENTO,
and is regarded as responsible for the loss of American interest in
the Middle East, which began when he labeled Nasser “nothing but a
tin-horn Hitler.” He always carried a copy of Stalin’s Problems of
Leninism, citing it as proof of the evil of Communism. He firmly
upheld the defense of Matsu and Quemoy, and helped develop the
Eisenhower doctrine and his policy of “brinkmanship” as Eisenhower’s
secretary of state. For ten points, name this namesake of a
Washington, D.C. airport. {Buck} After being abducted near Santa
Clara, he eventually wound up in the hands of two government agents
after stopping in Seattle. When these two were reassigned, he was sold
to Mercedes and her husband and brother. After rising to prominence by
defeating Spitz in a fight to the death, he came to admire a
particular master and attacked the Yee-hats in vengeance of the murder
of that master, John Thornton. For ten points, name this “Ghost Dog”
of the Klondike in Jack London’s The Call of the Wild. Jawaharlal
{Nehru} The near two hundred letters he wrote to his daughter were
published in 1936 as Glimpses of World History. His sister Vijaya was
the first woman president of the U.N. General Assembly, and he came to
prominence after the 1929 Lahore session. Some feel that he lost his
reputation as the proponent of nonalignment during his seizure of Goa,
his forceful incorporation of Hyderabad, the border dispute with China
over the Brahmaputra, and the accession of Kashmir that led to the
first India-Pakistani war. Nevertheless, his western training and
progressivism made him more accessible and flexible than Mahatma
Gandhi. For ten points, name this first prime minister of India.
{Obadiah} Its penultimate verse says that Israel shall return to
possess the Phoenician coast as far north as Zarephath. This book
warns the cliff-dwelling descendants of Esau that though they soar as
eagles, Yahweh will bring them plummeting down. For ten points, name
this book that predicts the destruction of Edom, the fourth book of
the minor prophets and the shortest book of the Old Testament. John
James {Audubon} (Jean {Rabin}) His sons completed a work begun in
collaboration with John Bachmann, and some of his work was edited by
F. H. Herrick as Delineations of American Scenery and Character. His
most famous work included Havell, Amsterdam, Bien, and Octavo
editions, and though it resulted in unrealistic poses because of dead
specimens, it has become a treasured set of artwork, and his name has
become synonymous with conservationists. For ten points, name this
ornithologist of Birds of America. {Yellow Tavern} In the aftermath of
this battle, Philip Sheridan traveled to Butler’s command at Bermuda
Hundred for refitting, and rejoined the Army of the Potomac on May
25th to cross the Pamunkey. Sheridan had gone on a cavalry raid
against Richmond to disrupt Confederate road and rail communications.
A small Confederate cavalry contingent followed Sheridan and engaged
his troops in battle, but the outnumbered Confederate cavalry was
defeated. For ten points, name this May 11, 1864 cavalry battle, an
offshoot of Spotsylvania, in which Confederate Major General J.E.B.
Stuart was killed. {Nut} Dead pharaohs supposedly entered her body,
from which they would later be resurrected. She is said to swallow the
stars and Ra each night, and expel them from her vulva each morning.
She married her brother against the demand of her father, but was
already pregnant when her father decreed that she could not give birth
in any month of any year. She was helped by Thoth, who was able to add
five days to the official calendar, and during those days, she gave
birth to Osiris, Horus the Elder, Set, Isis, and Nepthys. For ten
points, name this Egyptian goddess of the sky and wife of Geb.
{electromotive force} (accept {emf} before mentioned) This quantity
can be defined as the sum of the cross product of velocity and
magnetic field along a path, or it can be defined as the sum of the
electric field along a path. Faraday’s Law defines it as the negative
rate of change of the magnetic flux with respect to time, and Lenz’s
Law says that it is in such a direction as to oppose change in
magnetic flux. For ten points, name this quantity, usually measured in
volts, with abbreviation emf. {Baffin Island} Among its inland lakes
are Nettilling and Amadjuak. Nanisivik, at its northwestern tip, is
one of the world’s northernmost mines. In 1972, the Auyuittuq (oh-yuh-
took) National Park Reserve was established on the Cumberland
Peninsula on this island’s east coast. Geographically and
geologically, it is a continuation of Labrador, from which it is
separated by Hudson Strait, and it is separated from Greenland on the
north by its namesake bay. Lying on Frobisher Bay, Iqaluit is the
largest city on, for ten points, this Arctic island, the fifth largest
in the world and the largest in Canada. {Albigensian} crusade It was
sparked by the murder of Peter de Castelnau, a Cistercian papal
legate. Pitting Raymond VI backed by Peter II of Aragon, against Simon
de Montfort backed by France, it resulted in Louis XI gaining the
county of Toulouse in the 1229 Peace of Paris, and in the
revitalization of Occitan literature. For ten points name this
thirteenth-century crusade declared by Pope Innocent III, named for a
group of southern French Manicheans also known as Cathars or Bogomils.
{Horsehead Nebula} (accept early {IC 434}; prompt on {B 33}) An image
of it taken with the Anglo-Australian Telescope shows NGC 2023 in the
lower left. First detected photographically by E. Pickering in 1889,
it is designated IC 434, measures four arcs in width, and is situated
about sixteen hundred light-years from Earth, near the belt of Orion.
For ten points, name this collection of interstellar matter whose
shape is similar to that of an equine bust. Max {Brod} A confirmed
Zionist, he addressed this position in the essay collection On This
Side and on the Other Side, and served as drama advisor to the Habima
Theater Company in Tel Aviv following his 1939 flight from Nazism. His
novels include Three Loves, The Magic Realm of Love, and The
Redemption of Tycho Brahe. However, he is best known for publishing
the literary works of his friend, who had instructed him to burn said
works. For ten points, name this author who preserved Amerika, The
Trial, and The Castle after the death of his friend Franz Kafka.
Virgil Garnett {Thomson} This composer of the quintet Sonata da chiesa
studied under Nadia Boulanger and was strongly influenced by Erik
Satie. From 1940 to 1954, he served as music critic for the New York
Herald Tribune. He composed the opera Lord Byron, the ballets Filling
Station and Parson Weems and the Cherry Tree, and the scores for Pare
Lorentz documentaries The River and The Plow that Broke the Plains. He
won a Pulizter in 1949 for his score to Robert Flaherty’s Louisiana
Story, but his best known works feature librettos by Gertrude Stein.
For ten points, name this American composer of the operas The Mother
of Us All and Four Saints in Three Acts. Peace of the {Pyrenees} The
formation of the Rheinbund and the Battle of the Dunes paved the way
for this agreement. Under its terms, Roussillon and Artois changed
hands, and the rebellious Condé returned to France. Also stipulated
was the marriage of Louis XIV and Maria Theresa, but the dowry was not
paid, causing the War of Devolution. For ten points, name this 1659
peace which ended the Franco- Spanish War and marked the beginning of
French hegemony, named for the mountains on the border between France
and Spain. {platelets} (accept {thrombocytes} before mentioned)
Inherited morphological deformities of this type of cell include von
Willebrand’s disease and Glanzmann’s disease. A deficiency of
glycoprotein Ib (one b) on its cellular membrane leads to Bernard-
Soulier syndrome, and aspirin tends to impair this cell’s ability to
produce prostaglandins. In addition to storing and transporting
seratonin, epinephrine and histamine, this cell provides a surface for
fibrin strands to adhere to, thereby facilitating hemostasis. Also
known as a thrombocyte, for ten points, this blood cell is crucial to
coagulation. {Ghost Sonata}or {Spöksonaten} Friedrich Durrenmatt
claimed that modern drama had “never gone beyond the second scene” of
this play. This scene, taking place in the “Round Room,” begins with
the servants Bengstsson and Johansson discussing the meal of the
inhabitants of the house, who chomp on biscuits like rats. The
colonel’s wife, a mummy who hides in the closet, accuses the old man
Hummel of being a kitchen boy and Hummel promptly hangs himself. In
the final scene, the grotesque Cook makes his appearance, while the
colonel’s daughter reveals that she cannot have children. For ten
points, name this expressionistic drama which begins with a pairing of
the colonel’s daughter and the student Arkenholz, written by August
Strindberg. {Lysozyme }(accept muramidase before mentioned, accept
N-acetylmuramide glycanohydrolyase) Jolles and Canfield independently
found the amino acid sequence for its hen egg variety, and the protein
alpha-lactalbumin, which is found in cow's milk, is similar to it. It
cuts the beta-1-4-glycosidic bond between N-Acetylglucosamine and
N-acetylmuramic acid in peptidoglycan, and is thus also known as
muramidase. It's not penicillin, but it was first identified by
Alexander Fleming, who noticed its ability to kill bacteria. Common in
human snot, saliva, and tears, for ten points, this enzyme derives its
name from its ability to make bacteria break apart. {Jimmy} (prompt on
“Jim”) His father, Ryan, reminds him that he was sent “through the
vengeful and angry hand of God” to teach his parents a lesson, to
which this child responds “you can just pass the blunt to the nigga on
your left.” A member of the Five- Point Crips, he is expelled from
scouts after his similarly-named rival photoshops him into Kelleresque
gay porn, and his performance of “The Twelve Days of Christmas” gives
Jesus enough time to save Santa Claus from Iraq. He engages the
aforementioned rival, the only other “handi-capable” child in town, in
a “cripple fight” after the former, a wheelchair-bound boy named
Timmy, refuses to be part of his stand-up comedy routine. For ten
points, name this South Park resident known for his speech impediment
and use of crutches. Alfred {Adler} His concern for the common man can
be seen in his pamphlet, “The Health of Tailors.” He considered the
three ties by which men are bound to be occupation, society, and love,
and in 1912’s The Neurotic Character he reformulated the Oedipus
Complex as a desire to possess and overpower. Forming the Society for
Free Psychoanalytic Research in 1911, his focus on the subjectivity of
the patient’s psyche and his insistence that psychology be a social
rather than a natural science led to his break with Sigmund Freud.
Replacing the libido with the “striving for superiority” as man’s most
basic urge, for ten points, name this psychologist who founded the
system of Individual Psychology and who formulated the idea of the
inferiority complex. {Gaspee} Affair (accept obvious equivalents for
“Affair”) It was planned out in Sabin’s Tavern by a man named John
Brown, and conspirators included Aaron Briggs, Abraham Whipple, and
Ephriam Bowen. Joseph Bucklin shot Lt. William Dudingston, who had
arrived in March to enforce the Stamp Act, after Bucklin and other men
had rowed eight longboats up to the namesake vessel, which had run
aground on Namquid Point. For ten points, name this June 10, 1772
event, the first planned use of force by Colonists against the
British, in which a schooner was burned in Narraganset Bay. The
{Seagull} or {Chayka} A minor relationship in this play is that
between the poor schoolmaster Semyon Medvedenko and a young girl who
is perpetually dressed in black due to her unrequited love for the
main character, a writer. The doctor Yevgeny Dorn offers the writer
advice and the writer’s uncle, Pyotr Sorin, recommends that he write a
story based on Sorin’s own life called The Man Who Wished. Sorin’s
sister, Irina Arkadina, is the love interest of the more famous
writer, Trigorin. Based on a hunting trip with the landscape painter
Ilya Levitan, for ten points, this play involves a love triangle
between Trigorin, Konstantin Treplev, and the actress Nina, whom
Trigorin compares with the title animal, and was written by Anton
Chekhov. {moksha} or {mukti} It is the title and subject of the
eighteenth chapter of the Bhagavad Gita, and Aldous Huxley’s Island
uses it as the name of a hallucinogenic drug. One possible path to it
involves the elimination of avidya, or ignorance, by the gyana yoga,
or attainment of knowledge. The most difficult path, jnana, is only
possible during the last two ashramas, Sannyasin or Vanaprastha. The
most popular method is through devotion and love to a personal deity,
known as the bhakti yoga. For ten points, name this concept from
Hinduism, which can also be attained through good works, or karma; the
release of the soul from the samsaric cycle of death and rebirth. Sam
{Houston} Shot three times at the battle of Horseshoe Bend, he retired
in 1818 as a first lieutenant. He became known as “Big Drunk” and he
served in his most famous position before and after Mirabeau Lamar. At
the Convention of 1833 he represented the Nacogdoches where he moved
after a period living with the Cherokees. He was removed as governor
of his state in 1861 because he refused to swear allegiance to the
Confederacy. For ten points, name this antebellum Texas leader famous
for his victory at San Jacinto. {Point Counter Point} In a subplot,
the main character’s father, the future author of the world’s greatest
compendium of democratic literature, is accosted by his secretary
Gladys, with whom he is having an affair. Illidge, the communist, is
an accessory in the murder of the Mosley-like Everard Webley. The
other murderer, Spandrell, is himself murdered by the police after
playing Beethoven’s A Minor Quartet for the skeptical Mark Rampion,
who is based on DH Lawrence. It deals mostly with the aging artist
John Bidlake, the tart Lucy Tantamount, and the autobiographical
character of Philip Quarles. For ten points, name this musically
titled work by Aldous Huxley. {Stapler} (Thanks for the inspiration,
Matt Bruce, you cumguzzling fucktard) An actress with the first name
Robin who made several appearances on the show “In the House” shares
her last name with this object. In the Seinfeld episode The Apology,
Elaine rubs one in her armpit to offend her co-worker Peggy, and in an
episode of The Simpsons, Smithers futilely attacks Principal Skinner
with one. One is thrown at an “insolent cow” during a board meeting in
a Canadian anti-domestic-violence ad, and Milton has a strange
attachment to his red Swingline variety in the movie Office Space. For
ten points, name this object which is often used to affix two or more
pieces of paper together via the penetration and contortion of small
metal objects. {Glycerol} (accept {glycerin}e, accept
{1,2,3-propanetriol}) A naturally hydrophilic molecule, it is used in
both icing and frozen blood to prevent crystallization which would
otherwise damage the product. Discovered by Carl Scheele when he
heated olive oil with litharge, this by- product of saponification is
found the salt-solution known as spent lye, and nowadays it is
generally synthesized from propylene. The simplest trihydric alcohol,
this sweet, viscous chemical has formula C3H5(OH)3, a nitric acid
triester of it is often used to treat heart attack victims or create
explosives. For ten points, name this chemical, a molecule which joins
with three fatty acid chains to form natural fats and oils. {Tyr} It
was once revealed that his grandmother was a monster with 900 heads.
Many of his features are derived from the Irish Nuadu and Mithra, the
god of day in India. In order to furnish Aegir with a kettle large
enough to brew the ale of the gods, he accompanied Thor on a journey
to retrieve a cauldron from the giant Hymir, who is sometimes
considered his father. At Ragnarok he will kill and be killed by the
dog Garm, but his most famous feat was accomplished with the aid of
Gleipnir. For ten points, name this Norse god of war whose right hand
was bitten off by Fenris. {Luxembourg} The northern third of this
country is a forested highland region known as the Oesling. It became
rich through its production of iron ore, but this supply is now
drained and its steel industry thrives from iron imported from France.
Drained by the Sure and Alzette rivers, which flow into the Moselle
River that forms most of its eastern border, its southern region is
known as the Bon Pays and contains the city of Esch-sur-Alzette. The
home of both the European Investment Bank and the European Court of
Justice, this is, for ten points, what 998 square mile Grand Duchy,
which borders Belgium and Germany and shares the name with its capital
city? The {Magic Mountain} or Der {Zauberberg} The main character’s
group of hangers-on includes the sadistic piano player Wehsel, and the
malapropic Frau Stohr. At first bothered by the constant door-slamming
of Claudia Chauchat (show-shay), the main character later falls in
love with her. In the climax, Leo Naphta commits suicide after a
failed duel with the humanist Settembrini; and both men feel inferior
to the inarticulate Meynheer Peeperkorn. For ten points, name this
novel featuring Joachim Ziemssen and his cousin Hans Castorp, taking
place in a sanitarium and written by Thomas Mann. {Sundiata} His
mother survived the assassination attempts of his father’s first wife,
Sassouma, and, despite being a lazy bastard, he was given the griot
Balla Fasseke as a gift. According to legend, an enemy of his killed
all the children of his region except for him; he later wounded this
enemy, a king of the Kante dynasty named Sumanguru, at the battle of
Kirina before burning down Sumanguru’s town, Sosso. The son of the
hunchback “Buffalo woman” Sogolon and the Mandingo king Nare Fa
Maghan, he was also the grandfather of Mansa Musa. For ten points,
name this “lion king,” the first king of the Mali Empire. Gian Carlo
{Menotti} At the age of eleven, he wrote and composed The Death of
Pierrot. The founder of Spoletto’s “Festival of Two Worlds,” he
composed the ballets Errand into the Maze and The Unicorn, and
recently composed the operas Goya and The Singing Child for Plácido
Domingo. Though such operas as The Medium and The Telephone were
written in English, 1937’s Amelia Goes to the Ball was written in
Italian. For ten points, name this Italian-American composer of the
1951 television opera Ahmal and the Night Visitors. {Raman} effect or
{Raman} spectroscopy or {combination scattering }(before *) It is
often produced by argon-ion or krypton-ion lasers due to their high
continous wave power, although tunable dye lasers can also be used.
Its resonance version was predicted by Placzek, and when there are two
incoming photons colliding with a single molecule, the hyper-type can
be observed. The ratio of the number of molecules which can give up
energy for a photon to those which can absorb a photon determines the
relative intensities of the anti-Stokes and Stokes lines. Used in
spectroscopy to determine molecular structure, this is, for ten
points, what effect where a scattered photon changes both frequency
and phase after a collision, (*) named for an Indian scientist? {Dies
Irae} (dee-es eer-ay) This song is one of Ormus Cama's last hits in
Rushdie's The Ground beneath Her Feet. It consists of 17 tercets and
one quatrain, but an anonymous writer later added an unrhymed couplet
ending in “amen” to the end. It is included in the liturgy for All
Soul's Day, and Fauré and Duruflé departed from convention by refusing
to incorporate it into their requiems. Attributed to Tomas of Celano,
for ten points, this medieval chant is named by its first two words,
which mean "Day of wrath.” {Ganesha} (or {Vinayaka}) He is extensively
worshipped in the Deccan and depicted in Saivite (SHAY- vite) shrines.
One story describing his origin states that he was created out of clay
by Parvathi to stand guard over her modesty while she bathed. In his
role as the Lord of Hosts, he wrote down Vyasa’s dictatation of the
Mahabharatha, is often depicted riding a mouse, and is worshipped as
the god of obstacles. For ten points, name this Indian deity, whom
Homer Simpson wearing an elephant mask could not imitate, for the god
is graceful while Homer is not. The {Bonfire of the Vanities} The
protagonist's mistress Maria is illegally re-renting an apartment, and
her husband Arthur dies in a restaurant too expensive to call an
ambulance in. After a wrong turn into the Bronx, the African-American
kid who may or may not have been trying to hold up the main
character’s Mercedes gets run over and killed. For ten points, Sherman
McCoy goes from Master of the Universe to professional defendant in
this 1987 Tom Wolfe novel. The {Monte Carlo} Method(s) (Accept {Monte
Carlo Simulation} or equivalent) Stanislaw Ulam and Nicholas
Metropolis were among the less celebrated of the originators of this
technique, which was central to the success of the Manhattan project.
Originally called by such names as “statistical sampling,” it helps
solve problems with many degrees of freedom which are otherwise
intractable. For ten points, give the general name for this method
which has very little to do with a European principality. {Oskar}
Matzerath He spent time during World War II working as a circus
performer and also worked for a while as an artist's model, but he is
confined in a mental hospital when he tells his story. He never
believed that his mother's husband was his father, instead presuming
that his father was Jan Bronski. For ten points, name this character
with a voice that could shatter glass, who stunted his growth at the
age of three and plays the titular tin drum in Gunter Grass's first
novel. {O}{2} ({oxygen} molecule) The Winkler method can be used to
determine how much of this molecule is dissolved in water. It exists
in a triplet state with net spin angular momentum 1, due to 2
electrons with parallel spins in the 2 pi x and 2 pi y antibonding
orbitals, which also explains why this homonuclear molecule is highly
paramagnetic. It can be obtained by liquifying air followed by
fractional distillation to get rid of the more volatile nitrogen. For
ten points, name this molecule which binds to hemoglobin and is used
in aerobic respiration. {Piltdown Man} Though Pierre Teihlard de
Chardin was a prime suspect, the 1996 discovery of a trunk which had
belonged to Martin A.C. Hinton suggested that he may have created this
to revenge himself on his employer, A.S. Woodward, who publicized it.
Nevertheless, that publication had little consequence, as the
discovery of Australopithicenes marked this subject’s exit from the
anthropological spotlight. Discovered by Charles Dawson, for ten
points, this hoax, which was actually an orangutan jaw and a modern
skull, was named for the common in Sussex where it was discovered.
Aaron {Copland} He studied with Goldmark in New York, spent some time
in Paris, and died in Tarrytown, New York. Although the style of such
early compositions as the 1925 Music for the Theatre, was austere and
abstract, he radically changed it in the mid-'30s in an effort to
produce more accessible music. In his later career, he experimented
with serialism in his orchestral pieces Connotations and Inscape, and
with triadic style in Dance Panels and String Nonet. For ten points,
name this folk-influenced American composer who penned The Tender
Land, Fanfare for the Common Man and Rodeo. The {Peace} ({Eirene})
This play ends as its protagonist is serenaded by sons of Lamachus and
Cleonymus, after which he joins the lovely Harvest-home on the nuptial
couch. Earlier, that same protagonist is congratulated by a sickle
maker and cursed by manufacturers of crests, breastplates, trumpets
and spears. All of this comes about after he learns from Hermes that
the gods have fled and washed their hands of Greece. Beginning with
Trygaeus’ flight to heaven on a dung beetle, for ten points, this
Aristophanes play centers around the effort to dig out the titular
goddess, buried under a pile of rocks by War. {operon} In the
repressible trp system, tryptophan functions as a corepressor, binding
to the product of the regulatory gene. A better-known example is
induced by catabolite activator protein complexed with cyclic AMP, and
its three structural genes code for transacetylase, a permease, and
beta galactosidase, which catalyses the hydrolysis of lactose. For ten
points, name this model system for regulation of gene expression,
first described by Jacob and Monod for the lac system. (order not
important) {Lauds}, {Matins}, {Compline} and {Vespers} The Medieval
monastic day started at midnight with the first service. There were
services all through the day, named Prime, Terce, Sext and Nones--
essentially just ordinal numbers. The two earliest and two latest
services, however, had their own   names. Name them, 5 for one, 10 for
two, 20 for three and 30 for all four. {Categorical Imperative} In
Totem and Taboo, Freud says that an explanation of taboo might shed
light upon the origin of this philosophical concept. It was formulated
in opposition to Aristotle, who in the Nicomachean Ethics asserted
that moral theories should be based on the attainment of eudaimonia.
Expounded in the Groundwork for the Metaphysics of Morals, for ten
points, name this Kantian concept which in one formulation says, "Act
only on that maxim through which you can at the same time will that it
should become a universal law." {Elliptical} Galaxies Previously
thought to be formed when galaxies rich in dark matter collide and to
contain neither interstellar dust nor stars of spectral types 0 and B,
the Hubble-Reynolds Law gives the observed surface brightness profile
as a function of projected radial distance R. Usually reddish in
color, one example is M104 located in Virgo and named for a sombrero.
Assigned to one of eight classes based on the apparently length of
their minor and major axes. For ten points, name this type of galaxy
without spiral arms. {Dielectric} The Ewald-Oseen Theorem explains the
cancellation of the primary wave when light propagates through them.
Characterized by its relative permittivity, they can be damaged if the
electrostatic field and its corresponding voltage become large enough
to induce current. Examples of which include aluminum oxide,
porcelain, and air, for ten points, name this type of material which
is a poor conductor of electricity, but an efficient supporter of
electrostatic fields and is used in making capacitors. Ewan {McGregor}
Inspired to pursue acting by his uncle, Denis Lawson, who played Wedge
Antilles in the Star Wars Trilogy, his first starring role was as
Private Mick Hopper in the miniseries Lipstick on Your Collar, but he
is better known for a role in the cult success Shallow Grave. Recently
seen as Clerk Grimes in Black Hawk Down, his breakout role came as
heroin addict Mark Renton in Trainspotting. For ten points, name this
Scottish actor who starred as the lovesick protagonist of Moulin Rouge
and as Obi-Wan Kenobi in Star Wars Episodes I and II. Zebulon {Pike}
Though no historical evidence supports his claim to have participated
in the Battle of Fallen Timbers, it is known that he was killed at the
Battle of York. Ordered westward by General Wilkinson, this father-in-
law of William Henry Harrison was arrested by Spain but observed the
Southwest while being taken to Chihuahua for questioning. The
incorrect identifier of Leech Lake as the headwaters of the
Mississippi, for ten points, identify this American explorer whose
1806 expedition discovered the Colorado mountain that bears his name.
{Huang Ho} or {Yellow} River It empties into the Gulf of Chili, an arm
of its namesake sea. Connected to the Wei via the People’s Victory
Canal, it generally flows east, through "great northern bend" near the
Ordos Desert and then through a loess region where it receives most of
the silt from which its name is derived. Diverted in 1938 in defense
of Japanese invasion, it has changed course at least nine times.
Nicknamed "China's Sorrow," for ten points, name this fifth longest
river in the world and second longest in China behind the Yangtze.
{Type I} Error Limited in a series of experiments by the Bonferroni
correction, its value is identical for one-tailed and two-tailed
tests. The probability of its occurrence, symbolized alpha, can be
lowered by requiring very strong evidence to reject the null; however,
this step would lower statistical power and raise the probability of
accepting a false null. For ten points, name this statistical error in
which a true null hypothesis is rejected. {Eugenie Grandet} Nanon, the
maid, eventually marries Cornoiller, the title character’s bailiff and
keeper. After the title character’s love Charles marries the daughter
of the Marquis d’Aubrion, she marries the President de Bonfons. Her
miserly father, the richest man in Saumur, despite his millions, only
gives her two rare gold coins a year as presents. For ten points, name
this novel by Balzac revolving around the daughter of M Grandet.
{Romantic} Symphony (accept {Bruckner’s Fourth} Symphony before end of
question) Its first movement opens with a string tremolo in E flat
with its second part consisting of the composer’s typical rhythm, two
even quarter notes followed by triplet of quarter notes. The third
movement, a scherzo, builds on a number of hunting-horn calls and the
final fourth movement closes with a “sonorous apotheosis.” Premiered
by Hans Richter seven years after its completion, for ten points, name
this symphony, Bruckner’s fourth. Richard {Sheridan} His first
comedy's premier lasted an hour longer than intended due to a poor
portrayal of Sir Lucius O'Trigger. Later chosen by David Garrick to
succeed him as proprietor of the Drury Lane Theatre, in 1816 Lord
Byron wrote a Monody on his death lauding him as Right and Honourable.
Attaining his greatest theatrical triumph with the depiction of Sir
Oliver Surface's search for an heir, for ten points, name this 18th
century English playwright of the Rivals and A School for Scandal.
{Fischer esterification} Carboxylic acids are not reactive enough to
be directly attacked, hence the addition of a strong mineral acid such
as sulfuric acid. The acid catalyst protonates the carbonyl oxygen,
giving the carboxylic acid a positive charge and making it susceptible
to attack from an alcohol, which serves as solvent for the reaction.
Loss of water from this intermediate produces the desired product. For
ten points, identify this organic chemistry reaction, named for a
German chemist, where an ester is synthesized from carboxylic acid and
alcohol. {Cumaean Sibyl} or {Sibyl of Cumae} Apollo granted her wish
for as many years of life as grains of sand she could hold in her hand
for a promise to sleep with him. When she did not, he gave her eternal
life without eternal youth, and she was eventually so withered that
she was kept in a jar. As a very old woman, she offered nine of her
books to the Roman king Tarquin, who only purchased the remaining
three after she burned six. For ten points, name this prophetess, the
subject of a 1510 painting by Michelangelo. {Conspicuous Consumption}
Some suggest that it may be biological explained by an increase in
density of dopaminergic receptor sites of the brain in response to
purposeless hedonic excitement. Economist Edward Miller has argued
that a tax on its products--by definition above the level of the
Lindahl equilibrium -- would increase public welfare, a hypothesis in
opposition to the term's originator who believed pecuniary emulation
perpetuated societal poverty. Originally coined by Thorstein Veblen,
for ten points, name this behavior, the purchasing of goods based on
societal pressure rather than need. {Deserted Village} Encouraged by
the passage of the Enclosure Acts, three years after this work's
initial publication George Crabbe wrote a pessimistic reply. The
author tells us that the titular entity is the "loveliest of the
lawn," all of whose charms are withdrawn and in which "desolation
saddens all thy green." Including a concluding four lines written by
the author's friend Samuel Johnson, for ten points name this poem that
nostalgically recalls rural and rustic England and was written by
Oliver Goldsmith. {Cattle Raid of Cooley} or {Táin Bó Cúalnge} Incited
by an argument between two monarchs over who is the wealthiest, the
hero of the tale is cursed. He ties himself to a tree while attempting
to alone fend off alone an invading force, but kills his friend,
Ferdiad, whom Queen Maeve has convinced to join the fight. Ending with
King Aillil losing his most prized possession, for ten points, name
this event of the Ulster cycle, in which Cuchulainn prevents the
capture of the famous Brown Bull of Donn. {Jacobite} Rebellion One
plot on their behalf perpetrated by Francis Atterbury was used by
Robert Walpole to discredit the Tories. Atterbury's plot followed in
the wake an earlier uprising that ended with the Earl of Mar defeat at
Battle of Sheriffmuir. Following their last uprising, Flora MacDonald
helped their leader escape to the continent after the Duke of
Cumberland crushed their forces at Culloden Moor Arising in the wake
of the Glorious Revolution. For ten points, name this Scottish
movement which supported royal ascension of Bonnie Prince Charlie,
grandson of James II. Sea of {Okhotsk} (accept: {Okhotskoye} More) The
location of numerous coastal islands including Shantar and Yam, only
Ion Island is located in the open sea. Characterized by
counterclockwise currents that moderate the climate on its
southwestern shore, it receives the Penzhina River in the northeast
and Amur River in the southwest near Sakhalin. It is connected to the
Pacific by passages through the Kuril Islands and by the Tatar and La
Pérouse straits to the Sea of Japan. For ten points, name this
northwestern arm of the Pacific Ocean, which is found north of
Hokkaido and west of the Kamchatka Peninsula. {Fahrenheit 451} The
protagonist’s wife Millie likes to relax after a hard day by taking
tranquilizers and staring at a wall screen to achieve nothinkness. The
Red Beast carries his team at 100 mph to perform a duty assigned by
the dictatorship after World War III. One day he meets Clarisse, who
challenges him to explore what he destroys despite the injunction of
Captain Beatty, which leads to a career strolling through birch
forests memorizing text. For ten points, name this Ray Bradbury novel
about firemen who burn books. Claude {Lorraine} (accept Claude
{Gellée} before it is mentioned) Originally from Champagne, he was
trained as an artist by Agostino Tassi and his earliest surviving work
is Landscape with Cattle and Peasants. The author of the Liber
Veritatis, a volume of drawings copied after his own paintings, he was
said to have done so to protect against forgeries of works such as
Harbour Scene, Enchanted Castle, and Sermon on the Mount. For ten
points, name this man also called Claude Gellée, more famously named
for his region of origin. {Saxony} Its rule of Poland was interrupted
following the death of Augustus the Strong and the subsequent War of
Polish Succession. In the 15th century the Treaty of Leipzig split it
rulers into Ernestine and Albertine branches, though the Albertine
consolidated power in the 16th century following Duke Maurice's
obtaining of an electorate of the Holy Roman Empire. Bordering
Thuringia, Bavaria, and, Brandenburg. For ten points, name this
historical central European region and now German state with capital
at Dresden. {America First} It originated at Yale Law School with a
petition written by R. Douglas Stuart. Early members included Robert
Wood, Potter Steward and Gerald Ford, though Ford quickly resigned.
Member John Flynn, author of As We Go Marching, fought the inclusion
of Fascists and anti-Semitists. Aiming to preserve American democracy,
it was founded in 1940 but dissolved four days after the attack on
Pearl Harbor. For ten points, identify this controversial American
isolationist group promoted by Charles Lindberg. {Eddie & the
Cruisers} In 1962 they began their career together as the house band
at Tony Mart's. There they met Frank Ridgeway who was recruited to
join as keyboardist. After a moderately successful first album
released by Satin Records, the follow-up was to be called Season in
Hell, though was never released due to the lead singers death. The
search for those missing studio recordings for that album became the
subject of a 1983 movie. For ten points, name this fictional band
whose songs were actually performed by John Cafferty and the Beaver
Brown Band. {Solomon} He ordered the death of Simei after Simei
disobeyed him by crossing the Kidron Valley and removed Abiathar from
the priesthood. He was crowned before the death of his father, to
prevent his older brother Adonijah from taking the throne. Anointed by
Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet, he later ordered the death of
Joab. For ten points, identify this third king of Israel, son of
Bathsheba, and successor to David. {cirque} They may contain tarns, or
small lakes, and their widening leads to the formation of sharp
arêtes, cols, and horns. Their formation is a positive feedback loop,
because shadowing by its back wall causes them to deepen. Generally
resulting from erosion beneath a bergschrund, they usually hold recent
moraines. For ten points, identify this bowl-shaped basin at the head
of a glacial valley whose name is derived from the French word for
“circus.” The {Jungle Book} Its author gave the manuscript to his
child’s nurse to sell if she needed the money. A boy’s adoptive mother
raises him with strict knowledge of the “Laws,” telling him again and
again that he must one day kill his parents’ murderer. Captured as a
baby, he tries to escape his destiny by moving to a distant village,
but his enemy follows him. With knowledge imparted by his teachers,
Bagherra and Baloo, and information from a wolf, he kills the tiger,
Shere Khan, and returns to his happy life in the forest. For ten
points, name this Rudyard Kipling work about Mowgli. {Carmina Burana}
It opens with full orchestra and chorus backed by a steady timpani
beat. The fourth movement, a baritone solo, opens with four even notes
played by piccolo and glockenspiel. The only non-choral movement, the
sixth, is a dance while movement eight opens with ringing sleigh
bells. Opening and ending with “O Fortuna,” it is based on thirteenth-
century songs found in the Benediktbueren monastery. For ten points,
identify this choral and orchestral work by Carl Orff. {Pleasure
Principle} Bruno Bettelheim, in The Uses of Enchantment, connects the
story of the Three Little Pigs to this psychological entity. Sometimes
expressed via parapraxes, it is suppressed via sublimation though
critical theorists held that societal inertia tends towards
regression. According to Freud, it is the guiding force behind the
instinct to seek satisfaction and the failure to distinguish fantasy
from reality. For ten points, identify this governing principle of the
id. Marcus {Crassus} & {Nicias}  \- The first was Roman dictator from
82 to 79 BC who defeated Mithradates VI of Pontus in 85 BC; the second
defeated Athens at the Battle of Aegospotami and later established the
Thirty Tyrants.  ANSWER: Lucius {Sulla} & {Lysander} Name the
following pairs of figures who are contrasted in Parallel Lives, 5 for
one, 15 for the pair.  \- The first was a member of the first
Triumvirate who was killed at the Battle of Carrhae; the second an
Athenian was picked along with Alcibiades and Lamachus to lead the
Sicilian expedition and was executed after his surrender. Pavel
Ivanovich {Chichikov} In the ensuing discussion after this character's
bizarre actions are revealed, the postmaster suggests he might
actually be Captain Kopeikin, while others believe he might be
Napoleon in disguise. He doesn't own land, but finds a loophole
through a government initiative giving away land in the province of
Kherson. He plans to make money by using his purchases as collateral
for a loan, and perhaps receiving some compensation when he can report
a large business loss in the next census. For ten points, name this
main character of Gogol's novel Dead Souls. normalized {Gaussian}
distribution or {normal} distribution (grudgingly accept {bell curve}
before "bell-shaped"; prompt afterwards) It has 0 kurtosis excess and
0 skewness, and the area under this curve from the center to a given
point is given by the error function. Its Fourier transform is the
same curve with reciprocal standard deviation. The mean of any set of
variates with any distributon having finite mean and variance tends
towards this distribution, according to the central limit theorem, so
it is the limiting case of a binomial distribution as sample size goes
to infinity. For ten points, name this bell-shaped distribution. The
{Seven Samurai} or {Shichinin no Samurai} The group of cosmologists
who discovered the Great Attractor in the Centaurus Wall took this
name. At the end of the film of this name, the leader of the title
group comments, "Again we are defeated. The farmers have won. Not us."
in response to the evident wealth of the farmers, who only paid them
with room and board. During their stay, Shino begins a romance with
Katsushiro, and the village children start following Kikuchiyo around.
For ten points, name this Akira Kurosawa film about a titular group of
warriors. {Sabre Dance} This short piece appears with Dance of the
Rose Maidens and Lezghinka as part of a ballet set on a collective
farm. It appears as part of the festivities at the wedding of the
ballet's title heroine to a Red Army officer in southern Armenia. Used
on the Ed Sullivan show to heighten tension while plate spinners
performed, for ten points, name this best-known portion of the second
suite of the ballet Gayane, a xylophone-accented whirling mazurka by
Aram Khatchaturian. The {Passionate Shepherd} to His Love In Isaak
Walton's The Compleat Angler, a milkmaid sings some lines from this
poem, which inspired the John Donne poem The Bait. The speaker offers
"Fair lined slippers for the cold," "a kirtle / Embroidered all with
leaves of myrtle" and "A belt of straw and ivy buds, / With coral
clasps and amber studs," hoping "these pleasures may thee move."
Beginning, "Come live with me and be my love," for ten points, name
this Christopher Marlowe poem which inspired a reply by Sir Walter
Raleigh. {intensive} variables or properties The Gibbs phase rule can
be derived by combining the equilibrium constraints with the Gibbs-
Duhem equation, which states that for a system with n components, only
n+1 of these can be independent. They must be homogeneous functions of
degree zero, while their canonical conjugate variables, such as
entropy and particle number, are homogeneous functions of degree one.
Examples include the chemical potential, mole fractions, and pressure.
For ten points, name these variables which do not depend on the size
of the system, unlike extensive variables. {Yellow Submarine} The
occupants outwit Vacuum Man, and triumph over the Butterfly Stompers
and the Apple Bonkers. Commanded by Old Fred, it passes through the
Seas of Consumer Products and Green Phrenology on its way back to the
underwater kingdom of Pepperland. The main characters meet the pseudo-
intellectual Jeremy Hillary Boob, PhD., a real Nowhere Man, and help
drive off the music-hating Blue Meanies. For ten points, name this
title nautical vessel of a 1968 animated Beatles film. {Argos} In the
7th century BCE, under the tyrant Pheidon, its army defeated the
Lacedaemonians at Hysiae. This ancient city dominated the Peloponnesus
from the fall of the Mycenaean Empire to the 6th century BCE, when it
began a long struggle with Sparta. In 272 BCE, Pyrrhus of Epirus died
while attacking this city, whose famous residents included the
sculptors Ageladas and Polykleitos. It was supposedly the birthplace
of Perseus and a certain hundred-eyed hunter who was set to watch over
Io. For ten points, name this city whose inhabitants were known as
Argives. {death instinct} or {death drive} (accept {Thanatos} before
the end) Studies of traumatized soldiers and the repetition compulsion
led to the incorporation of this concept, far removed from sexuality.
Melanie Klein included it in her account of the development of an
early superego, claiming that it acts to generate infantile anxiety
together with the birth trauma. This nihilistic tendency operates in
opposition to Eros, the pleasure principle. For ten points, name this
concept, the natural desire to regress to a tensionless state of non-
existence, which Freud referred to as Thanatos. {Cygnus} (prompt on
{Northern Cross} prior to mention in the question) The Kepler mission
will use a digital camera that will take pictures every 15 minutes of
this constellation for at least 4 years. It contains the North
American Nebula, and the blue and gold double star system Albireo can
be seen at the opposite end from the alpha star, whose name is Arabic
for "tail." It also contains the X-ray source X-1, a binary system
including the first strong candidate for a black hole. It is also
called the Northern Cross, and the long arm points into the Summer
Triangle asterism, with the alpha star Deneb at the top of the cross.
For ten points, name this constellation of a swan. {Eva Luna} In a
sequel, once again set in Agua Santa, we hear of Clarisa, who died of
amazement when the Pope met homosexuals dressed as nuns. The title
character grows up in the house of a doctor who works on mummifying
corpses. She is conceived when her mother Consuelo cures an Indian
dying of snakebite by making love to him. The refugee Rolf Carlé
becomes the lover of, for ten points, what Amerindian Scheherazade,
the title character of two works by Isabel Allende? {Zhou} or {Jo} or
{Chou} dynasty Cheo-tsin, called the Sardanapalus of China, set fire
to his palace with himself and his queen shut inside so that he
wouldn't fall into the hands of Woowong, the founder of this dynasty.
It saw the "hundred schools of thought," and shares its name with a
short-lived dynasty that was declared in 690 CE by the Empress Wu. For
ten points, name this dynasty whose later Eastern period is further
divided into the Spring and Autumn period and the Warring States
period, and which reigned between the Shang and Qin dynasties.
{pointillism} or {stippling} (prompt on {divisionism} prior to mention
in the question) This style was blamed for the birth of a tattooed
baby, and visitors to an exhibition by Les Vingt were warned of the
danger of catching smallpox from such works. Delacroix's Romantic
painting was claimed as an inspiration in the book D'Eugène Delacroix
au Néo-Impressionisme, by Paul Signac. Based on the theories of Blanc
and Chevreul, this technique is usually done with oil paint, because
bleeding or running would defeat the purpose. Related to divisionism,
for ten points, name this painting technique exemplified in A Sunday
Afternoon on the Isle of La Grande Jatte by Seurat. {Hamiltonian} The
classical KAM theorem solves the small-divisor problem when small
perturbations are introduced to this function. The partial time
derivative of a probability distribution p is given by the Poisson
bracket of this function with p. The Legendre transform which
transforms from generalized velocity coordinates to conjugate momenta
produces it from the Lagrangian. The time- independent Schrödinger
equation is an eigenvalue equation for, for ten points, what operator,
the observable corresponding to the total energy? The {Art of Love} or
{Ars Amatoria} The final section, dedicated to "you, Penthesilea, and
to your troop," includes the warning, “a field grows old by continual
harvesting," referring to the aging brought on by childbirth. For
women, the author recommends an alluring walk, showing a bit of
shoulder or upper arm, and speaks out against bad breath and stubbly
legs and underarms. The poet suggests the Circus Maximus as a good
spot to meet choice women, and offers advice on how to maintain
multiple mistresses. For ten points, name this Ovid work, a manual for
conducting affairs. {Njord} or {Niord} or {Niordhr} or {Njorthr} He
made his residence in Noatun, and some sources claim his first wife
was his sister Nerthus. He was called upon to quell the tempests of
Aegir. His second marriage came about as a result of his pretty feet,
which made him the choice of Thiazzi's daughter Skadi, who was hoping
for Balder. He was sent with his famous children to Asgard as part of
the hostage exchange sealing the peace between the Aesir and Vanir.
For ten points, name this Vanir god of the sea, the father of Frey and
Freya. {George IV} (or {George Augustus Frederick, 21st Prince of
Wales} if any idiots want to go for that) He was nicknamed Prince
Florizel because he wrote letters under that name to the actress Mrs.
Robinson. In his dotage, the large amounts of cherry brandy and
laudanum he consumed convinced him that he had played a key role in
the battle of Waterloo. His secret marriage to the Catholic widow Mary
Fitzherbert was declared illegal at his father's request, and he
caused a scandal when he tried to divorce his second wife, Caroline of
Brunswick. Pitt the Younger succeeded in limiting, for ten points,
what Hanoverian's powers while he served as Regent for his
increasingly mad father? {From the Earth to the Moon} First published
in France in 1865, it had several names in America, such as “The
Baltimore Gun Club” and “The American Gun Club.” The work itself was
subtitled “Direct Passage in 97 Hours and 20 Minutes,” even though the
title journey didn’t occur until the sequel was published several
years later. For ten points, name this novel, written by Jules Verne,
which featured a group of Civil War Veterans who want to fire a “space
bullet” at Earth’s satellite. {Okinawa} During the fighting, General
Bruckner was killed by artillery fire, while General Ushijima
committed suicide through hara-kiri. Over 10,000 American lives were
lost during the fighting, a number dwarfed by the 100,000 Japanese
soldiers killed, along with another 100,000 civilians. The Japanese
eventually withdrew after the sinking of the Yamato meant that they
could not be relieved by fresh troops, leaving the U.S. in control of
for ten points, what strategically significant member of the Ryukyu
islands in April 1945? {Averroës} or {Ibn-Rushid} Born in 1126, in
Cordoba, his introduction to Abu Ya’qub, an Arab philosopher, made him
realize that Islam required an integration of modern belief and
ancient thought. His actions had little effect within the Islamic
Empire, but the Catholic Church condemned him when it learned that the
newly- formed Scholastic movement was using his works as study aids.
For ten points, name this author of General Medicine, an Arab doctor
and philosopher who attempted to reconcile Islamic tradition with
Greek thought via his translations and commentaries on the works of
Aristotle and Plato. {Cnidaria} These dipoblastic organisms have an
ectoderm and a gastroderm separated by mesoglea or mesenchyme. They
have a gastrovascular cavity and possess radial symmetry. The three
main classes of this animal are anthozoa, scyphozoan, and hydrozoa.
One of its characteristic features is the nematocyst, which is a
structure used for stinging and adhering to prey. For ten points, name
this phylum containing corals, sea anemones, and jellyfish. Horatio
{Hornblower} He began his naval career as a midshipman on the HMS
Justinian in 1788, but he was soon given a transfer to the
Indefatigable after challenging another midshipman to a duel. He
worked his way up the ranks, his first command being the frigate
Hotspur. Over the course of a career that spanned more than 50
recorded years, he also commanded such ships as the Atropos and
Sutherland, before eventually becoming England’s Lord of the Fleet.
For ten points, name this British naval officer, the hero of a series
of C. S. Forester novels. {fjord}s (prompt on “firth” before it is
mentioned) This geographic feature lends its name to a breed of horse
also known as the West Country Horse, one of three from its country of
origin. They differ from bays in that their source of water is the
ocean and not an emptying river; some say that the Hudson River is
actually an example. Up to 1300 feet deep, a large number of them are
found in Kenai. Defined as a valley deepened by glaciation to below
sea level, for ten points, these long, thin, deep indentations of
steep coastline known as firths in Scotland are common in northern
areas such as Alaska and Norway. {Miles} {Davis} (accept either
because of the early clues referencing his first name) He has been
known to be ahead, run the voodoo down, be in the sky, and smile, all
in titles of songs and albums bearing his first name. While he started
off in the bebop vein, and collaborated with John Coltrane, his later
ensemble moved from “cool” to “fusion,” and included luminaries such
as John McLaughlin, Joe Zawinul, Chick Corea, and Herbie Hancock. For
ten points, name this chameleon-like jazz trumpeter best known for
Bitches Brew, Sketches of Spain, and Kind of Blue. {Grignard} reagent
Nickel catalysts have been known to be useful in cross-coupling these
with aryl halides. Because of their high reactivity, they do not store
well and are normally synthesized fresh for each use; they can be used
to make hydrocarbons, carboxcylic acids and other compounds in
addition to their most common use. For ten points, name this chemistry
staple which reacts with an aldehyde to form an alcohol and consists
of an organic magnesium halide in a nonreactive solvent. {The
Courtier} The narrator instructs the reader not to belch or spit at
the table, to use a fork in lieu of fingers, and to refrain from
rinsing one's mouth out with wine. To fulfill this role in life, its
author claimed that one needed to be of noble birth, handsome, and
good at dueling. In addition, the work stated that this person had to
be good at swimming, hunting, riding, and the arts. The work was
published in 1528, and quickly became a European bestseller. For ten
points, identify this handbook of court life, written by Baldassare
Castiglione. William {Shatner} Some have speculated that this swallow-
voiced songster would be well suited to certain Schoenberg songs, but
he prefers to focus his energy on newer music such as “Insensataez”
and “Spleen.” Recently, he partnered with Ben Folds on “Fear of Pop,
Vol. 1;” Ben decided to choose him after hearing his 1968 magnum opus
The Transformed Man, perhaps most famous for its unique covers of “Mr.
Tambourine Man” and “Lucy in the Sky With Diamonds.” For ten points,
name this host of VH1’s One-Hit Wonders who has boldly taken speech-
singing where no man has gone before, perhaps most famously in a
series of commercials for Priceline.com. {Achitophel} It has been
theorized that he was the grandfather of Bathsheba, which would
explain why he was given a highly regarded position at court. Over the
years, he acted as councilor for David, giving him expert advice on a
variety of topics, ranging from war to politics to economics.
Nevertheless, the piece of advice he is remembered for was one that
was ignored. For ten points, name this royal advisor, went home and
hanged himself after Hushai’s military strategy was accepted instead
of his after siding with Absalom against David during the former’s
revolt. {regular expression} (prompt on early "regex" or "regexes" or
"regexen") The mathematical ones are a tool for defining languages,
but are frequently used in programming languages to make manipulating
strings easier. While they are equivalent in power to a non-
deterministic finite automata, many implementations of them provide
extra features that make them Turing complete. Most advanced text
editors include an option to search for and replace strings using
them, but the exact syntax is often varied. Perl offers what is
usually consider the most fully featured version of them and many
programs offer "Perl Compatible" ones. For ten points, identify these
tools often jokingly abbreviated and pluralized as "regexen." Sei
{Shonagon} Her common surname refers to her position as a “minor
counselor” in the royal court. The daughter of the poet Kiyohara
Motosuke, she served there for about a decade at the turn of last
millennium under both Emperor Ichijo and Empress Sadako. Such
experiences as “Annoying things” and “Things which distract in moments
of boredom” form the bulk of a collection of over 320 short essays
translated into English by Arthur Waley and Ivan Morris. For ten
points, name this bitter rival of Lady Murasaki, the Japanese
courtesan who authored the Pillow Book. {in loco parentis} In Scent of
a Woman, Frank Slade explains his presence at Charlie Simms’ hearing
by citing this policy. Commonplace until the social tumult of the
60’s, examples include signing in and out of dormitories and
stipulating that a certain amount of feet must be on the ground at all
time when a visitor is in the room. Most famously, one’s door must be
open at a certain wide angle at all times when a member of the
opposite sex is visiting. For ten points, give this Latin phrase often
used to describe once commonplace restrictive policies concerning the
social (and especially sexual) lives of college students, literally
meaning “in the place of parents.” {janissary} or {janissaries } They
were divided into cemaat, bölükhalki and segban divisions, each of
which was commanded by an aga. They were not allowed to grow beards, a
privilege limited to free men. Recruited by the devsirme system, their
discipline waned to the point where, by the 18th century, they spent
more time participating in palace coups than doing actual fighting.
Wiped out when Sultan Mahmed II had cannon fire directed into their
barracks, and then executed the survivors in what would be termed the
“Auspicious Incident” of 1826, for ten points, this elite corps in the
army of the Ottoman Empire was composed of draftees from Christian
provinces. {Paterson} Its first page is the source of its author’s
famous Imagist dictum “No ideas but in things,” and it proceeds to
introduce things such as newspaper clippings and letters from friends
of the poet, including Allen Ginsburg. Throughout its five books, the
author re-imagines the pastoral idyll, examines ordinary modern lives
and celebrates the industrial grime of the author’s hometown, which is
characterized as exuberantly American. For ten points, name this epic
poem by William Carlos Williams inspired by the title New Jersey city.
Giovanni Battista {Pergolesi} Early works of his include Salustia, and
Lo firate 'nnamorato, his first success. His tragic end caused a
mystique to surround him in the mid-1700s, and many second-rate
composers tried to attract attention to their work by passing it off
as a newly-discovered work of his; a set of these spurious melodies
were famously reworked by Stravinsky in his ballet Pulchinella. For
ten points, name this Italian Baroque composer as well known for his
death from tuberculosis at the age of 26 as for works such as a Stabat
Mater and the comic opera La Serva Padrona. {Banach} Space Although
they are complete, they do not necessarily have an inner product. The
L P spaces are all examples of them. They are all vector spaces,
moreover the norm in them can be used to define a metric. Usually they
are infinite dimensional, as they are frequently used in functional
analysis; however, finite ones do exist. Every Hilbert Space is, for
ten points, one of these complete normed vector spaces named for a
Polish mathematician. Robert Ranke {Graves} A close associate of Laura
Riding, his relationship with her produced the 1928 Pamphlet Against
Anthologies. He dealt with his traumatic World War I experiences in
the novels They Hanged My Saintly Billy and Sergeant Lamb of the
Ninth, in the poetry collection Fairies and Fusiliers, and in his
autobiography, Good-Bye to All That. His version of The Greek Myths
developed his assertion that poetry originated in the concept of the
moon goddess in her triple aspect of virgin, nymph and crone, an
assertion set forth in The White Goddess. For ten points, name this
English poet and author of such historical novels as Count Belisarius
and I, Claudius. {carcharodon megalodon} (accept {carcharocles
megalodon}) It lived during the Miocene and Pliocene epochs, though
some claim that it is still extant. It probably fed upon the whales
that evolved at the same time. Thought to be anywhere from 40 to 60
feet long, its teeth were as large as six inches across, and its jaws
expanded to six feet, explaining why its species name means, “giant
tooth.” For ten points, identify this favorite subject of crypto
zoologists, a shark thought to be three times as large as the modern
great white shark, with which it shares a genus. {Yellow Journalism}
Its name derives from a Richard Felton Outcault cartoon of a big-eared
Chinese kid who wears a shirt that reads “look at me back.” Outcault
was replaced by George Luks after defecting to the rival New York
Journal. Eventually, competition between the Journal and the World
extended beyond cartoons, producing the timeless phrase “you supply
the pictures, I’ll supply the war.” For ten points, name this term
exemplifying the policies of Pulitzer and especially Hearst, a term
indicating journalism utilizing extreme sensationalism and lurid
features to attract readers. {Kool-Aid Man} (prompt on “Pitcher Man”
on early buzzes) In the first episode of The Family Guy, Peter Griffin
is arrested after dumping money from a blimp during the Super Bowl,
but this character interrupts his trial. In a series of comic books
and an Atari 2600 game starring this character, he faces off against
Scorch and his minions, the Thirsties. Appearing next to Roger Bhan’s
profile on the ACF website, he debuted in 1975 as “Pitcher Man.” For
ten points, name this giant red character who busts through brick
walls and shouts “Oh, yeah” in order to market a certain sugary
beverage. John {Burgoyne} His play, The Maid of the Oaks, was
performed in honor of William Howe and his mistress, Mrs. Loring, but
was not nearly as successful as The Heiress. His immense baggage train
consisted mostly of champagne, and its immensity only worsened the
situation of his troops as they marched through the wilderness from
Fort Ticonderoga to the Hudson River in July of 1777 in an effort to
link up with Howe and St. Leger at Albany. For ten points, identify
this British major general who, surrounded by a much larger American
force commanded by Philip Schuyler and Horatio Gates, surrendered his
command at Saratoga. St. {Christopher} Allegedly born in Canaan with
the name of Offerus, he was blessed with size and strength, and
resolved to serve only the worthiest, rejecting Satan in the process.
Eventually, a hermit convinced him to accept Christ. Instead of fast
and prayer, he carried the faithful across a raging stream. One day, a
child he was carrying revealed itself as God, turning this man’s staff
into a palm tree, converting many and angering Dagnus, who had this
martyr beheaded. For ten points, identify this patron saint of travel,
with a name from the Greek for “Christ bearer.” {Phèdre} or {Phaedra}
The title character addresses her father, Helios, as the “noble author
of a sad family.” Three characters play the role of confidants in this
play, namely Ismene, Theramenes, and Oenone, a slave woman who commits
suicide after attempting to save her mistress by propagating a lie.
The title character, cursed by Aphrodite, utilizes a comparison to
Theseus to avow her love to a woman-hater who falls in love with
Aricia. Theseus, believing that Hippolytus attempted to rape the title
character, asks Poseidon to kill his son, which happens, and is
followed by the title character’s suicide. For ten points, name this
Jean Racine tragedy about a mythological woman who fell in love with
her stepson. Ieoh Ming {Pei} This banker’s son, whose name means “to
inscribe brightly,” studied under Walter Gropius at the Harvard
Graduate School of Design. In 1955, he obtained U.S. citizenship and
founded his own firm. His first project, the National Center for
Atmospheric Research, caught the attention of Jackie Kennedy, who
commissioned him to build the John F. Kennedy Library. For ten points,
identify this architect, whose buildings include the East Wing of the
National Gallery of Art, the Glass Pyramid of the Louvre, and the Rock
and Roll Hall of Fame. {Triton} Some regions of it show surface ridges
nicknamed “cantaloupe terrain,” which appear to be tectonic in nature.
Other features of it include nitrogenous geysers and wind streaks from
its atmosphere, which derives from the sublimation of its surface
ices. Colder even than Pluto, it is also larger, suggesting that it
once orbited the sun, and was captured by the planet it currently
orbits. For ten points, name this satellite with a retrograde orbit,
the largest moon of Neptune. Jean {Shepherd} He once encouraged his
listeners à la Freeburg to read the nonexistent book I Libertine,
which consequently made the New York Bestseller list without being in
print. Visitors to Disney World may have noticed that his voice takes
you through the “Carousel of Progress.” Shel Silverstein dedicated his
ABZ Book to this longtime WOR radio personality, whose own literary
output includes the memoirs The Ferrari in the Bedroom and In God We
Trust, All Others Pay Cash, which provided the basis for his most
famous achievement. For ten points, name this humorist who wrote and
narrated the movies My Summer Story and A Christmas Story. Lyman Frank
{Baum} Born the son of an oil magnate and a women’s rights activist,
he took up writing when his general store in South Dakota failed.
Using such pen names as “Floyd Akers” and “Edith Van Dyne,” he
declared that he wished to write modern children’s stories, and ones
that did not frighten children, like those of the Brothers Grimm. He
also wrote books for adults, such as The Last Egyptian, but his most
notable success came with a novel regarding a land divided into “four
color-coded countries.” For ten points, identify this author of The
Wonderful Wizard of Oz. {One} The theme of this song was derived from
the 1971 movie Johnny Got His Gun. The speaker is “fed through the
tube that sticks in me / Just like a wartime novelty. / Tied to
machines that make me be.” During the chorus, he stops to “Hold my
breath as I wish for death. / Oh please God, wake me.” He concludes
with a rant which explains his grim situation: “Landmine / Has taken
my sight, / Taken my speech, / Taken my hearing, / Taken my arms, /
Taken my legs, / Taken my soul, / Left me with a life in Hell.” For
ten points, name this fourth song off the Metallica album …And Justice
for All, whose title exemplifies the extreme solitude of the speaker.
{Komodo Dragon} or {Monitor} Its existence was made known to the west
in 1910 when shipwrecked Dutch officer Steyn van Hensbroek killed one
and sent it to a zoo on Java. On its native island, it is known as the
ora, but on Rinca and Flores, it is inappropriately given a name
meaning, “land crocodile,” as it is not a crocodilian, but a monitor.
They carry seven virulent strains of bacteria in their teeth, which
aids them in the killing of such prey as wild pigs, deer, and
occasionally humans. For ten points, identify these reptiles named for
the Indonesian island on which they are found, the largest lizards on
earth. {Chaeronea} This site was the birthplace of Plutarch.
Precipitated by the seizure of Elateia, the most notable battle to
take place here was broken wide open when the Athenians charged after
a feint by the opposing commander’s hypaspists. Troops led by the
victor’s son Alexander charged into the gap, encircling the Thebans on
the right wing and slaying to the last man the homosexual Sacred Band.
For ten points, name this 338 B.C. battle in Boeotia at which Philip
II of Macedon secured Macedonian hegemony in Greece. {Gimpel the Fool}
He is goaded into marrying the harlot Elka, who bears him six
illegitimate children who always catch the evil eye, forcing him to
retrieve abracadabras for them. When he catches Elka sleeping with
another man, his conclusion that he imagined the sight is backed up by
an obscure passage of Maimonides. After Elka dies, he is visited by
the Spirit of Evil, who convinces him to pour urine into the bread
dough at his bakery to revenge himself on the people of Frampol, who
delight in getting him to believe whatever he is told. For ten points,
name this title character of an Isaac Bashevis Singer short story, a
so-called fool who believes that everything is possible. {Nemesis}
Some sources label her as the deified form of Leda. Other sources
assert that Zeus ravished her in the form of a swan, and when she gave
birth to the egg containing Helen, Zeus tossed it between the legs of
Leda. This goddess makes her home at Attic Rhamnus, and is depicted
wearing a silver crown with stag horns, carrying an apple bough and a
wheel, and with a scourge at her girdle with which to punish men who
boast of and hoard their riches. For ten points, name this Greek
goddess of retribution, whose name has come to denote an opponent or
foe. {American Pastoral} The narrator of this novel attends his 45th
high school reunion and sees such old acquaintances as Mendy Gurlik, a
delinquent who taught him how to jack off. Nathan Zuckerman then sees
Jerry, the confrontational brother of the main character, and decides
to recount said main character’s life story. The main character’s
story ends as he realizes that his wife Dawn, a former Miss New
Jersey, is having an affair with Orcutt. After a career as a star
athlete at Weequahic High, he inherits his father Lou’s Newark Maid
glove business, but his life unravels in 1968 when his radical
daughter Merry blows up a post office. For ten points, name this 1997
Pulitzer Prize winning novel about Seymour “Swede” Levov, Philip
Roth’s not-so-idyllic account of America in the 50’s and 60’s.
{Meissner}-Ochsenfeld effect In the London theory, the wave equation
for the vector potential can be rewritten in the form of the Proca
equation, producing an effective photon mass term. This limits the
depth of penetration of the field and, for a large enough sample,
makes a material perfectly diamagnetic. This behavior is not exhibited
by a perfect normal conductor, so its presence is an independent way
of observing superconductivity. For ten points, identify this “effect”
in which magnetic fields are expelled from superconductors. {Antigone}
She forces her nurse to promise never to scold her dog Douce again,
even if the dog should piss on the carpet. Later, she attempts to
conduct a futile conversation with the guard Jonas regarding the
difference between soldiers and guards. Even after her uncle tells her
that her brother was in reality a horrid person, she decides to
contradict his orders anyway, declaring “A chacun son role.” At the
end, Eurydice slits her own throat with her sewing needles, and Hémon
stabs himself after seeing that this title character has hanged
herself. Créon continues his bureaucratic duties in, for ten points,
this modern adaptation of a Sophocles play by Jean Anouilh. {Pickwick
Papers} or The {Posthumous Papers of the Pickwick Club} Its
illustrator, Robert Seymour, killed himself after a few months,
leaving the author on his own. Mr. Wardle’s fat, greedy servant, Joe,
often falls asleep standing, having the first literary case of sleep
apnea. Very different is the titular character’s man, Sam Weller, a
clever Cockney. Accompanied by his three friends, a romantic, a lover
and sportsman, the hero visits several English cities before Mrs.
Bardell takes him to court over a marriage proposal and not even the
great lawyer Serjeant Buzfuz can keep him out of Fleet prison. For ten
points, name this first Charles Dickens work, consisting of reports
filed by Phiz and his friends. {Popul Vuh} Its name means “Book of the
Mat” and it begins with creation myths, showing how the first beings,
made from wood by Hurakan, are disloyal and torn to pieces by birds.
The Great White Pig and other luminaries finally make true men from
cornmeal. Later sections tie contemporary rulers to the gods; one
episode has the Hero Twins descending to the underworld to defeat the
Lords of Death in a ball game similar to basketball after the Lords
kill their father and uncle in a pickup game. For ten points, name
this Mayan tome about the Quiche people. The Great Proletarian
{Cultural Revolution} or {Wen Hua Da Ge Ming} Pedicab passengers were
forced to pedal while drivers relaxed and women on the street had
their heads shaved and lipstick scrubbed off. Schoolchildren bayoneted
LBJ masks at recess and streetlights were derided because their red
meant stop. People not “red” enough were covered with flour and
marched through the street. Lin Biao's compilation, the Little Red
Book, was carried by everyone. For ten points, name this 1966-75
wrecking of Chinese society by Mao Ze Dong. Orson {Welles} He wanted
to play the lead in the rock opera Tommy and his later films,
including Mr. Arkadin and Touch of Evil, showed how money and power
destroy men. His second-best film, The Magnificent Ambersons features
an opening montage of a man trying on many suits of clothing and a
tacked-on happy ending. That was added to avoid having others edit the
movie, as happened to his greatest film, for which he supervised every
other element down to sewing costumes. For ten points, name this
director who was brought to Hollywood with his Mercury Theatre to make
Citizen Kane. {Molière} or Jean Baptiste {Poquelin} Some have
speculated that he was the Man in the Iron Mask, having faked his 1673
death and lived another 40 years in prison. Relentless criticism and
his unhappy marriage to Armande Béjart inspired such efforts as
Impromptu de Versailles and The Forced Marriage. Other works include
Sgnarelle and The Scatterbrain as well as such collaborations with
Lully as The Bores. For ten points, name this French comedic dramatist
who wrote The Imaginary Invalid and Tartuffe. Betty {Friedan} or Betty
{Goldstein} In her youth she thanked men for holding doors by kicking
them in their shins. Her autobiography, Life So Far, came out in 2000
and her 1993 work, The Fountain of Age, denied that growing old was a
bad experience. Her most famous work featured such Ladies’ Home
Journal articles as “The Sandwich Maker,” and came about in 1957 when
she found her college classmates were as unhappy as she and claimed
they were all living in “comfortable concentration camps.” For ten
points, name this founded of NOW and the author of The Feminine
Mystique. {Zeeman} Effect The experiment demonstrating it was
suggested by Hendrik Lorentz and had already failed for Faraday. Light
seen in the experiment was similar to sunspots, showing those objects
to be intensely magnetic. Showing that electrons are affected by a
magnetic field, it proved light and magnetism are connected and helped
determine that atoms are composed of charged particles. For ten
points, name this physical effect which prompted the discovery that
tripling of spectral lines was caused by the altering of electron
spins. {Liberty} Ships The most famous is the Hog Island variety, but
they were produced in many yards. They were destroyed so quickly at
first that one complete voyage was considered a successful career.
Actually called EC2s, FDR nicknamed them “ugly ducklings.” The wife of
Henry Wallace sponsored the first one, the Patrick Henry, which sailed
to Alexandria, Egypt. Designed by Henry Kaiser and built in as little
as four and a half days, they were replaced after 1943 by the bigger
and faster Victory types. For ten points, name these famous
prefabricated vessels of World War II. {Ainu} Only a small number of
elderly women speak their language, which is similar to Turkic and
Altaic tongues. Their culture is linked to the Jomon and focused on
hunting and fishing before agriculture was forced on them. Their
religion centers on sacrifice of a bear, who returns from death with
gifts of fur and food. Samurai are thought to be descended from them,
giving noble Japanese slightly distinct facial features. They can’t
now be distinguished by appearance, though they once sported round
eyes, mustache-like tattoos on women and heavy beards on men. For ten
points, name these indigenous people of Japan. Jan {van Eyck} He
served as a secret agent for Philip the Good, accompanying that duke
on his 1428 trip to find a third wife and painting Isabella of
Portugal. Vasari wrongly credited him with the invention of oil
painting, but he is still famous for such works as his Annunciation
and Madonna of Chancellor Rolin. The Three Marys at the Sepulcher may
actually have been painted by his brother, Hubert, who assisted him
with The Adoration of the Lamb, but is otherwise completely
overshadowed. For ten points, name this Dutch artist renowned for The
Arnolfini Wedding. Bill {Tilden} He spent his last years in prison for
fondling a teenage boy, perhaps a consequence of his overprotective
mother’s advice to stay away from women. He failed to make the varsity
squad at the University of Pennsylvania, but still wrote the classic
book The Art of Tennis. He beat the Australian Gerald Patterson to
take the 1920 Wimbledon championship, but in later years forced the
British champion to come to face him in America. He also led the U.S.
team to seven straight Davis Cup victories. For ten points, name the
first American to win the men’s singles title. {Argon} Until 2000, its
atoms were thought not to combine with each other or any other element
and could only be trapped mechanically in cavities of other
substances. The first noble gas discovered on Earth, Cavendish
predicted it, but it wasn't found until 1894 when a gas remained after
nitrogen and oxygen were removed from air. Mixed with nitrogen in
incandescent light bulbs, its only source is the atmosphere, of which
it makes up .93 percent. For ten points, name this element named for
its inertness whose symbol was A until the Fifties and is now Ar.
Robert Anson {Heinlein} His 1940 story Solution Unsatisfactory
predicted the U.S. would win World War II by dropping an atomic bomb
on an Axis city. This was part of his “Future History” series
detailing world events from 1950 to 2600, collected as The Past
Through Tomorrow. He was a naval officer until selling his story Life
Line in 1939 and he wrote a series for juveniles which started with
Rocket Ship Galileo. The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress was his first book
and he won four Hugo awards, but turned off some fans with the fascist
wonderland of Starship Troopers. For ten points, name the author of
Stranger in a Strange Land. {Jade} Its greasy feel, which leads to one
type being called "sheep's fat," allowed it to be located by walking
barefoot in rivers. It is stronger than steel, but has a beautiful
sound when made into musical instruments. Emperor Qian Long (Chee-ahn
Lung) invaded Burma to get at that country’s superior supplies and it
ranges in color from creamy white to violet, depending on impurity
levels of calcium, chromium and manganese. Both nephrite and an
aluminum silicate are called by this name, but nephrite is much more
common. For ten points, name this precious stone best known for its
deep green variety. {Nanomachine}s ({Nanotechnology} is fine, too, but
prompt on nanotubes.) One possible consequence of their existence is
the “gray goo” catastrophe, in which their exponential spread consumes
all life in a short time. Tiny, cage-like versions can deliver drugs
straight to sites on the liver and artificial muscles made from them
contract when electricity is applied. They might be used for clothes
that change temperature on command or furniture that changes shape.
They can be easily created because their tiny units are held togther
by Van der Waals forces and one will attract several others. Their
greatest potential is use in assembling and disassembling objects in
short periods of time. For ten points, name these devices made from
units a billionth of a meter long. {N}ew {Y}ork {Times}{V}ersus
{Sullivan} The advertisement was signed by Hollywood stars, as well as
many clergymen who subsequently said use of their names was
unauthorized. Of information reported, William Brennan said, “It is
uncontroverted that some of the statements…were not accurate
descriptions of events which occurred in Montgomery.” It was ruled
that the white sheriff who brought suit against The Committee to
Defend Martin Luther King and the Struggle for Freedom in the South
was not defamed because no actual malice had existed. For ten points,
name this 1964 Supreme Court case in which the First Amendment was
found to apply to state tort law, a suit against a paper with 394
subscribers in Alabama. {Diffraction} It makes the sound of thunder
from distant lightning low because sound must get past many obstacles
and longer wavelengths more easily make it, unlike a close strike’s
sharp crack. It ruins magnified images if wavelengths employed for
viewing are larger than objects seen. The Fresnel type occurs if that
scientist’s namesake number is greater than one; the Fraunhofer
variety is seen if the value is less than one. It happens because
Huygen’s principle says all points on a wave front are propagation
sources, so even the tiniest opening can ruin a soundproof room. For
ten points, name the phenomenon of waves bending when passing edges of
openings. The {Faerie Queene} It has Arcasia bound by Guyon, but not
killed, thus showing the sensuality of her Bower of Bliss must always
be restrained. A section celebrates the Christian virtue of Lady Una,
who frees her parents from a dragon with the aid of holiness
personified, the Red Crosse Knight, whose goal is to restore Eden.
Walter Raleigh arranged for the publication of its first books and
appears as Timias, while Mary, Queen of Scots, appears as Duessa. The
best-known personage is represented by the chaste knight, Britomart,
whose marriage leads to the reign of a Virgin ruler. For ten points,
name this epic dedicated to Elizabeth I by Edmund Spencer. {Whistler’s
Mother} or {Arrangement in Grey and Black}: Portrait of the Painter’s
Mother Done after sculptor Albert Moore's forms, it was made after its
painter deserted his lover, Joanna Heffernan, and had no regular
model. A picture is overhead and a curtain hangs on the left. Broad
brushstrokes have been used to depict the wall, but the flesh and
hands are very detailed. Its creator wanted it appreciated for formal
qualities and asked, “What can or ought the public to care about the
identity of the portrait?” The subject rests her feet on a wooden
stand and wears a lace cover with a black dress. For ten points, name
this 1872 depiction of the painter of The White Girl’s female parent.
{Gabriel} He was named patron saint of telecommunications in 1921, but
more interesting is the possibility that he is actually a female who
educates souls for nine months before they are born. He once fell into
disgrace for disobeying God’s command, but bounced back to lead
Mohammed’s army at the battle of Bedr, inspire Joan of Arc and stop
Queen Vashti from appearing naked before Ahasuerus. He is more famous
for guarding Eden and telling Daniel that a Messiah would be born, a
message repeated to Mary much later. For ten points, name this
archangel whose name means “God is my strength.” {Taj Mahal} Its roof
has mud tiles mixed with gold to show humility and its terrace is
stabilized with iron-filled casements. Its cenotaphs use gemstones to
depict flowers in pietro dura and its garden is divided by canals and
based on the Persian chaharbagh plan. 20,000 men built it, many
carving their names in Persian or Devangari, and its namesake
destroyed the Christian settlement at Hooghly, selling the people into
slavery and having the priests trampled by elephants. Because white
symbolizes Brahmins and red kshatriyas, the main building is faced
with marble while the adjacent mosque and Assembly Hall are red
sandstone. For ten points, name this Agra mausoluem of Shah Jahan and
his wife Mumtaz. The {Thirty Years’} War Its end saw Swiss and Dutch
independence formally confirmed and the population of central Europe
resorting to cannibalism. Christian IV invaded, but retreated and gave
up Holstein after four years. The Spanish conquest of Trier had caused
Louis XIII to take part after Richelieu had subsidized Sweden for
years. Although the Swedes smashed their enemies at Leipzig, they were
nearly annihilated by a Spanish and Austrian army at Nordlingen,
leading to the Peace of Prague. The trouble started when Protestant
states formed the Evangelical Union to counter the threat of Baron
Tilly's Catholic League. For ten points, name this conflict ended by
the 1648 Treaty of Westphalia. Georg Friedrich Bernhard {Riemann} His
talent was discovered when he tried to mathematically prove the Book
of Genesis. As a student, he first suggested that the area around
electrical charges could be described mathematically and his doctoral
thesis for Gauss paved the way for a surface on which multi-valued
functions of complex variables can be described as single-valued. His
second-greatest legacy involved the sum of one and an infinite series
of numbers to the power of x. To this day, no one is sure what values
of x will equal 0, but this scientist guessed complex numbers with
real parts equal to ½ fit the bill. For ten points, name this German
known for geometry where parallel lines never cross and for his zeta
function. {Magnolia} Chinese eat its fried flowers and Americans use
its wood for popsicle sticks. Turkeys, squirrels and other wild
animals eat its seeds, while a medicine obtained from its bark can
relieve asthma. The first arose 65 million years ago and the 240
species live everywhere from the Himalayas to the Amazon jungle.
Breeders are working on dwarf versions and types with giant flowers,
but its unaltered flowers are up to 15 inches across and smell like
lemon. Named for a French botanist, it is a symbol of the South, and
specifically Mississippi. For ten points, name this tree with white
blossoms, on the steel variety of which a horrible chick flick was
made. {Histamine} It is produced by decarboxylation of an amino acid
and the liver deactivates any that circulates through methylation and
oxidation reactions. It causes phosphorylation of an intercellular
adhesion protein, creating gaps between cells into which fluids can
seep and may also cause leukocytes to release cytokines. Appearing
after IgE brings a response from a mast cell, it also causes
constriction of smooth muscle, so its release brings on asthma attacks
when triggering substances appear. Its release is stimulated by
antibodies against mosquito saliva and in cases of hives and it causes
nerves to signal pain. For ten points, name this protein involved in
allergic reactions. {Ashoka} His given name means "sorrowless," but he
was called by such epithets as Beloved of the Gods and Gentle Visaged.
His sister, Sanghamitra, founded a nunnery and his brother, Mahendra,
was missionary to Ceylon. He himself sent missions to Epirus, Cyrene
and Egypt, built 84,000 stupas and gave up hunting. Seeing moral law
as key to governing, he had edicts carved on pillars and rocks all
over his land and the lions topping one serve as India's national
symbol. For ten points, name this grandson of Chandragupta who may
have become a Buddhist novice at some point and renounced violence
after killing 100,000 Kalingas. John {Dewey} His greatest teacher was
G. Stanley Hall, who introduced him to the scientific method and led
him to fuse idealism and experimental science. He said knowledge
guided interaction with the environment, a theory called
“instrumentalism,” and attempted to apply his theories of knowledge
acquisition to education in How We Think. His article “The Reflex Arc
Concept in Psychology” said active participation is the sine qua non
of learning. For ten points, name this author of The School and
Society and Democracy and Education. {Resonance} Its existence
encourages people to sing in the shower because surfaces there are
reflective and at the right distance for it to occur at vocal
frequencies. Microwaves create it in water, something that is very
easy because H2O has three distinct rotational modes and three more
vibrational modes. It is more familiar for the sound in a seashell,
actually an increase of background noises. For ten points, name this
type of vibrational amplification caused by an external force that is
at the same frequency as an object's natural vibration. The {Merry
Wives of Windsor} It mocks Sir Thomas Lucy, who caught the author
poaching and ran him out of town. The Welsh clergyman Hugh Evans and
French doctor Caius are constantly ridiculed for their accents,
leading them to take revenge on their tormentors by stealing horses.
The main plot concerns the lust of Queen Elizabeth’s favorite, a lust
which forces him to hide in a laundry basket and later enter a haunted
wood in the pursuit of poon. For ten points, name this Shakespeare
play in which Mistresses Page and Ford make a fool of Falstaff. Albert
{Speer} His son is a finalist in the competition to redesign Beijing’s
city center. Only a stump built to test weight-bearing ability remains
of the 800-foot diameter dome he intended for a capitol building and
almost no other works survive. Two exceptions is the abandoned
Zeppelin strip at Nuremberg and the elaborate set for Leni
Riefenstahl’s The Triumph of the Will. For ten points, name this
architect and armaments minister of the Third Reich, the only
defendant to enter a guilty plea at Nuremberg. {Iceland} Glima, a form
of wrestling, is its traditional sport, but soccer is the most
popular. In 1998, 64% of this country's births were to single mothers,
but its generous maternity insurance and leave give it extremely low
infant mortality. Its largest glacier, Vatnajokull, is bigger than all
others in Europe combined and its capital city, whose name means
“smoking bay,” is the world's most northerly. For ten points, name
this country on the second largest Atlantic island, with capital at
Reykjavik. {Strong} Force Its direct effects cannot be observed, but
if it were 10% stronger, no element but hydrogen could form and life
would not exist. It can be considered a kind of color force and its
exchange particles are usually pions, as predicted by Yukawa. Its
range is shorter than the diameter of most nuclei, but it can usually
oppose the electromagnetic forces that cause nucleonic repulsion. For
ten points, name this fundamental force that holds atomic nuclei
together, the strongest of the four fundamental forces. The {Great
Gatsby} Imaginary works referenced in this novel include Goddard’s The
Rise of Colored Empires and Vladimir Tostoff’s Jazz History of the
World. Its epigraph by Thomas Parke d’Invilliers ends with the line
“Lover, gold-hatted, high- bouncing lover, I must have you!” Though
the narrator says of the title character that he “represented
everything for which I have an unaffected scorn,” he breaks off his
relationship with Jordan Baker after said title character is shot by
George Wilson. For ten points, name this novel about the West Egg-
dwelling lover of Daisy Buchanan, narrated by Nick Carraway and
written by F. Scott Fitzgerald. {Egg} In the Pelasgian creation myth,
the universe was born from one which was produced when the serpent
Ophion coupled with Eurynome, the Goddess of All Things. Ishtar
arrived in a giant one that fell from the moon into the Euphrates.
Jian Di, mother of the first Shang ruler, became pregnant after eating
a black one that fell from the sky. The Kalevala says that the world
was created from the broken fragments of one that sat on Ilmatar's
knee. The sun god Re emerged from another black one before creating
the world. For ten points, name the object which figured in all these
myths, described in The Hobbit as “box without hinges, key or lid;
yet, golden treasure inside is hid.” constant volume {heat capacity}
(accept molar or molecular{specific heat} before it's mentioned;
accept constant volume molar{ heat capacity} before "molecular mass";
do not accept{ constant pressure heat capacity}) For a system with
fixed volume, this quantity equals the mean square of the energy
fluctuations divided by Boltzmann's constant times the temperature
squared. In most crystals at low temperatures it is proportional to
the cube of the temperature, a fact that is reproduced by the Debye
model. For a diatomic ideal gas, the translational degrees of freedom
contribute 3/2 N k, while rotations and vibrations each give N k.
Equal to the molecular mass times the specific heat, for ten points,
name this quantity defined as the partial derivative of energy with
respect to temperature at fixed volume. Philip K. {Dick} >From 1974 to
his 1982 death, he was possessed by an alien that arrived in his head
on a beam of pink light and all his later works concern that
experience. The short-lived television series Out of This World was
based on his story “Impostor.” His Hugo-winning The Man in The High
Castle deals with the aftermath of an Axis victory in World War II,
and A Scanner Darkly deals with a schizophrenic undercover cop who
pursues his own drug-pushing separate identity. For ten points, name
this author whose novel Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep became the
movie Blade Runner. Maya {Angelou} or Marguerite {Johnson} When young,
she was certain that Shakespeare must have been a black girl to
understand her life so well. A speaker of Fanti, she edited Cairo’s
Arab Observer and taught at university in Ghana. Nominated for an Emmy
after acting in Roots, her newest book is A Song Flung Up to Heaven.
She read “I Shall Not Be Moved” at Clinton’s inauguration, and is best
known for the story of her Arkansas childhood. For ten points, name
this author of I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings. {Enoch} He was able to
see the past and future of mankind, so many prophetic books bearing
his name were written from 200 B.C. on. Kabala and William Blake
thought he became the angel Metatron, the lesser Yahweh, and Mormons
identified him with Joseph Smith. These notions arose from the story
that he “walked with God and he was not, because God took him.” For
ten points, name this father of Methuselah who was taken to live in
Heaven as reward for his piety. The {Nose} A St. Petersburg sculptor
recently paid homage to it by attaching a 220-pound version to an
apartment building. It masquerades as a State Councilor, humiliating
its owner by taking a higher position than his job of Collegiate
Assessor. Captured by a policeman, it finally returns to its proper
place on its own after a doctor claims that anything he might do with
it would be useless. Found in a loaf of bread by Ivan Yakovlevich, for
ten points, name this body part which escapes from Kovalyov in a Gogol
short story. {Christina's World} A barn occupies the upper center of
the work and the grass around it has been recently mowed, unlike that
surrounding the subject. The artist's 30 -year-old wife, Betsy, served
as model, but he painted on a 55-year-old's skeletal arms. Every year,
visitors to Cushing, Maine recreate the subject's pose, positioned to
crawl to the farmhouse built by her great-grandfather and shared with
her brother. For ten points, name this 1948 Andrew Wyeth painting of a
girl in a pink dress looking at her home on a hill. {Titan} It
receives only as much light as the full moon gives to Earth and has a
surface pressure 60% greater than Earth's. Octane is believed to be
synthesized in its atmosphere, so frozen gasoline rains on its rivers
and lakes of ethane and methane. In 2004 Cassini will parachute a
probe onto it to learn what mysterious dark and bright bodies on its
surface are. For ten points, name this second largest moon in the
solar system and largest of Saturn. {Mansfield Park} In one scene of
this novel, a reading from Sterne’s A Sentimental Journey is
interpreted as flirtation. The heroine is the only member of the
household with the convictions to refuse a role in an immoral play
while her uncle, Sir Thomas, is doing business in Antigua. Once her
cousins are gone, Henry Crawford falls in love with her, but fails to
win her heart by getting her brother promoted, and he proceeds to
elope with Maria Rushworth. In the end, she gains the love of Edmund
when he gives up on the frivolous Mary Crawford. For ten points, name
this novel about Fanny Price's travails in the Bertram household,
written by Jane Austen. Scripps Howard National {Spelling Bee} Though
it was not held from 1943-1945, it dates all the way back to 1925,
when it was won by Frank Neuhauser of Louisville. The 2003 installment
was won by Sai Gunturi of Dallas, who took home $12,000 for his
efforts, though the one most well remembered by the media occurred in
1997, where Sudheer Potru was eliminated after royally fucking up on
“pachymeter,” leading to a showdown between Prem Trevidi of New Jersey
and New York’s Rebecca Sealfon. For ten points, name this preteen
spectacle that is often televised on ESPN2 and sponsored by Scripps-
Howard. {Cherenkov} Effect or Radiation It was once thought to be
similar to the light emitted by dyes exposed to light, but its
namesake showed that it lacked gradual decrease in light. A similar
effect is gamma rays having enough energy to pass light and make a
visible cone. Explained by Frank and Tamm, it exists when high-energy
radiation passes through transparent material. For ten points, name
this effect similar to a sonic boom, in which charged particles
passing through a medium at a speed greater than that of light produce
visible light. {Symphony No. 3} in E-flat major or {Eroica} It
contains the first funeral march incorporated in a symphony. The first
theme is a simple four-bar melody which starts with cellos and has
other instruments joining one by one. The second theme is subdued, but
soon gives way to great dissonance. A cycle of violence alternating
with repose in the form of gentle woodwinds and violins playing a
theme of death continues until the coda. This evokes movements of a
“Grand Army of the soul” bent on conquering the world. Another man’s
name was first inscribed over the composer’s on the title page. For
ten points, name this Beethoven work originally dedicated to Napoleon.
{Demand Curve} The Hicksian version is steeper than the Marshallian
because Hicksian only accounts for substitution effects. That of a
monopolist is also that of the whole industry and that for each
oligopolist is more elastic than for the industry as a whole. The more
firms there are, the more elastic it becomes. It always slopes down
and depends both on consumer preference and the ability of other firms
to meet needs. For ten points, name this graphical representation of
the relationship between price asked and product desired. {Banana} In
Beverly Hills Cop, Axel Foley uses one to incapacitate a police car.
It is the Koran's forbidden fruit in Eden. Britain's oldest was found
in a 500 -year-old Tudor rubbish pit and America's first were sold at
the 1876 Centennial Exposition for 10 cents each. Its name is
Portuguese from an African root and India now grows the most. There
are 300 kinds, but Musa sapientum is commonly eaten in America, and
the Cavendish variety will soon go extinct. For ten points, name this
curved yellow fruit. {Kublai Khan} He never slept with fewer than five
girls from his harem, who serviced him for three straight days before
being replaced with a new team. When he ate, his attendants, all
female, stuffed napkins in their mouths to avoid contaminating his
food. Anyone who looked at his funeral bier was killed with the
injunction, "Your master needs you. Go serve him in Heaven." After he
defeated his brother Arigh Boke in a civil war, he ruled more men than
any previous king. He founded a new capital at Shangdu, defeated the
Song and sent two expeditions against Japan. For ten points, name this
first Yuan emperor, the employer of Marco Polo. George {Babbitt} His
amazement at the Chateau, the town’s new picture palace, leads him to
exclaim, “You got to go some to beat this dump!” He has “zip and
zowie” and is proud of his wife Myra’s cocktail party and his own
election to vice- presidency of the Booster Club, but all crumbles
when his best friend, Riesling, commits murder. Life doesn’t seem
worth living until he flirts with Mrs. Tanis Judique for a while and
comes away a changed man, even if he does return to the conservative
life of a Zenith businessman. For ten points, name this titular real
estate broker of a Sinclair Lewis novel. {Michaelangelo} Buonarroti He
wished to be buried in Florence, but the pope wouldn't allow it, so
his nephew secretly shipped out the body in an unmarked packing crate.
The antiquities collection of Lorenzo de' Medici inspired his early
work Battle of the Centaurs and Lapiths and he completed the Palazzo
Farnese. In Rome, he designed uniforms for the Vatican guards and
worked on the reconstruction of St. Peter's for a while. The face of
St. Bartholomew in The Last Judgement is his and he also created a
famous series of Pietas. For ten points, name this artist who painted
the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel. Lenny {Bruce} or Leonard Alfred
{Schneider} He was arrested in 1951 for dressing as a priest and
fraudulently soliciting funds for lepers in Miami Beach. A shell-
passer in several World War II battles and married to a stripper, he
joked about Hitler in show business and stewardesses throwing babies
from airplanes, as well as Catholics, homosexuals and the Ku Klux
Klan. Norman Mailer and James Jones defended him after his obscene
material got him was arrested in 1964, but he was dead of a drug
overdose two years later. For ten points, name this filthy comic whom
REM claimed was not afraid. {Dominicans} or Order of the {Friars
Preachers} Their viciousness during the Inquisition got them called
"hunting dogs of God," a Latin pun. One of them, Riccoldo di Monte
Croce, wrote a refutation of the Koran in 1320, one of the only
medieval works based directly on Arabic sources. Created by Innocent
III, they practiced strict poverty and included women from the start,
rejecting abbeys for convents. They were given special authority to
start up crusades against Muslims, Livonians and heretics and their
ranks included Albertus Magnus. For ten points, name this order whose
namesake saint sent them out to spread the Gospel. {dangling
participle} (accept “dangling modifier”) Founded in 5000 BC, its
purpose was to accomplish some goals. Discovered in 1900, products
containing the element include various chemical compounds. Born to a
carpenter, his first novel was published in book form. Honored by the
Romans, temples to this god were built. And of course, “walking across
the campus, the statue was seen by students.” For ten points, the
above examples all illustrate what grammatical error occurring
repeatedly in quiz bowl questions, a condition where a certain
modifying verb phrase is incorrectly applied to an absent or distant
noun, rather than the subject of the sentence’s main clause that
directly follows? {To His Coy Mistress} John Donne said that it was
probably meant to "perplex the mind of the fair sex.” It makes fun of
the language of courtship, speaking of "wooing on the banks of
Ganges...Till the conversion of the Jews" and has "quaint" in "All
your quaint honor turn to dust" referring to female pudendum.
Elsewhere, the speaker reminds the addressee that he hears “Time’s
winged chariot hurrying near.” For ten points, the speaker wishes that
he had “world enough, and time” for the pursuit of poon in this
Marvell poem. The {Great Illusion} or La {Grande Illusion} Its scene
of French prisoners singing the Marseillaise when a French victory is
scored is repeated in Casablanca. Von Rauffenstein, played by Erich
von Stroheim, shoots down two Frenchmen, who are imprisoned with a
wealthy Jew named Rosenthal. Though their treatment is humane, they
make many escape attempts and finally make it when the aristocrat
Boieldieu sacrifices himself for the other two and Marechal and
Rosenthal are helped by a farm woman in going to Switzerland. For ten
points, name this 1937 Jean Renoir movie. Tibetan {Book}s{ of the
Dead} An individual’s karma will be revealed before his eyes just
before passing and this collection holds advice, mostly gathered by
the Nyingma school, on knowing the end is coming and controlling the
process. It reveals that one of six worlds awaits: that of gods, demi-
gods, men, evil ghosts, animals or demons. Life will be entirely new,
but station determined by past actions. Survivors may perform rites to
ease the sufferings of those trapped with devils in such places as
Avici, the “hell without respite.” For ten points, name these
Himalayan volumes of sutras and tantras that serve as guides to the
afterlife. {Rorschach} Inkblot Test It led to the discovery of the
Bewegung response, which is the same for imaginative healthy people
and deluded madmen. It is based on the game Klexographie, at which its
inventor was so adept as a child that he was called "Klecks." People
who detect symmetry are said to have a good grasp of reality, but
modern research doesn’t usually support its usefulness. It has ten
sections, including three pastels and two with some red which are
meant to elicit emotions. It should be followed with requests for more
detailed responses about what is detected. For ten points, name this
test in which bilateral blots are examined for images. {Kenya} Coffee
and tea are its main exports and its national anthem is “O God of All
Creation.” Lake Rudolph lies in it and this country’s two greatest
rivers are the Tana and Galana. The Rift Valley splits its highlands
into the Mau Escarpment and the Aberdane range. Almost all land is
sparsely populated except the fertile southwest, home to three-
quarters of the people. It has large white, Arab and South Asian
minorities and its largest tribe is the Kikuyu. Its greatest port is
Mombasa. For ten points, name this East African country with capital
at Nairobi. Johann Wolfgang von {Goethe} An eight volume, 6000-page
series details what he was doing most days of his life. At one point,
he thought he had been imprisoned for seven years for loving Leonora,
the Duke of Alfonso's sister, but, in fact, he was just out of his
mind. Coiner of the term morphology, he was an amateur scientist who
discovered the intermaxillary bone and wrote On the Theory of Colors.
His first play was The Lover’s Caprice, but he is more famous for such
writings as Iphigenia in Tauris. For ten points, name this German
author of Faust and The Sorrows of Young Werther. {H}enry {James} This
man, the model for the H.G. Wells title character Boon, once told
Edith Wharton to “keep making the movements of life” in a letter about
Wharton’s marriage. His doppelganger sketch “Jolly Corner” followed
his first story, “A Tragedy of Errors,” and the novels Confidence and
The Reverberator. While writing his autobiography, The Middle Years,
he became a British citizen in protest of the USA’s World War I
policy. For ten points, name this author of The Spoils of Poynton, The
Princess Casamassima, Washington Square, Daisy Miller, The Golden
Bowl, and Portrait of a Lady. Das {L}{ied von der erde} [The {Song of
the Earth}] It opens with a song built around the line “Dark is life;
dark is death” and later describes a nightmare in which an ape
crouches on graves. Its second movement, The Lonely One in Autumn,
uses the season as a metaphor for loneliness at death. The thirty-
minute finale, The Farewell, is a funeral march tinged with assurances
of rebirth. In between are celebrations of the joys of life: Of Youth,
Of Beauty, and The Drunkard in Spring. Inspired by the diagnosis of a
potentially fatal heart ailment, this work is a setting of Hans
Bethge’s loose, often misattributed translations of Chinese poems. For
ten points, name this unnumbered symphony for contrabass and orchestra
by Gustav Mahler. {Hawking} radiation Its namesake “temperature” is
calculated by multiplying the cube of the speed of light by the Dirac
constant and dividing by the product of 8 pi, the gravitational
constant, the Boltzmann constant, and the mass of the object being
heated. It causes mass loss at a rate proportional to the inverse
square of the mass, leading to an increasingly fast process. Because
only one of the particles involved is observed to have positive mass,
by conservation, the counterpart must have negative mass-energy; thus,
creation of a real particle- virtual particle pair at the event
horizon will result in mass loss. For ten points, name this radiation
emitted by black holes, described by a disabled Cambridge physicist.
{Final Fantasy III} [accept {Final Fantasy VI} or {Fainaru Fantajii
Roku}] Its score includes “The Mystic Forest,” “The Snake Path,” and
“Coin Song,” but many consider its dramatic high point to be the “Aria
de Mezzo Carattere” sung by Maria and Draco. The plot begins when
magic returns to the world after a thousand year absence, causing a
fight over the Goddess Statues between Emperor Gestahl and General
Kefka. Opposing the villains are such characters as the painter Relm
Arrowny, the licentious king Edgar, and the slave girl Terra Branford.
For ten points, name this 1994 entry in a popular Square series, a
Super Nintendo game which was the best-selling RPG to date. {zaibatsu}
[or {keiretsu}] The first one arose in order to provide free
conversion among the grain tax, cash, and promissory notes in exchange
for interest-free loans from the government. They became prominent
after the bulk of national assets were auctioned off to them to
finance the suppression of the Satsuma Rebellion. The Three Diamonds
one supplanted the government shipbuilding force as a supplier to the
navy, the Sumitomo had a copper monopoly, and the Asano had an
exclusive contract to import kerosene. For ten points, name these
companies, including Sanwa, Fuyo, and Mitsubishi, which were family-
controlled multiindustrial concerns at the top of the economy in the
Meiji period. {suitors} of Penelope [or equivalents] Most of them came
from Same (SAH-may), Zacynthos (zah-KIN-thaws), or Dulichium (doo-
LIKK-ee-oom). Their ranks included Liodes, a priest, Ctesippus (kuh-
TEE-sip-oss), who helped spark their doom by throwing a hoof at a
beggar, and Eurymachus, who seduced the maid Melantho. A force to
avenge them was led by Eupeithes (ey-oh-PAY-ith-ees), father of their
leader, Antinous (an-TIH- noh-oss). They were delayed for three years
by the weaving of a burial shroud and eventually slain with the aid of
Philoetius (fil-oh-EY-tee-oss), Eumaeus (ey-oh-MYE-oss), and
Telemachus. For ten points, identify this group which tried to usurp
the throne of Odysseus. {original} jurisdiction In Illinois v. City of
Milwaukee, the Supreme Court held that the exercise of this privilege
is not mandatory. The handful of cases in which it is used each year
usually involve boundary disputes between states, as in the “Ellis
Island case,” New Jersey v. New York. It was granted in “all Cases
affecting Ambassadors, other public Ministers and Consuls, and those
in which a State shall be Party” in Article III of the Constitution.
For ten points, name this type of Supreme Court purview which does not
require an appeal from a lower court. {telomere}s A 1999 experiment by
Griffith and de Lange suggests that they are arranged as a loop rather
than a single line. Their associated reverse transcriptases are one of
the few DNA polymerases to carry an RNA template. In humans, they are
sequenced by a repeating TTAGGG string of three to twenty kilobases
and are usually most active in germ cells. Because they shorten with
each somatic cell replication, they may be a mechanism by which
senescence occurs. For ten points, name this buffer region at the end
of a eukaryotic chromosome, associated with theories about mechanisms
of aging and cancer. {Romance of the Three Kingdoms} [or {San Guo Yan
Yi}] Episodes in this novel include Sun Ruan Er killing her husband
with a needle, Xiahou Dun eating his own severed eyeball, and Lu Bu
riding into battle on the “five-hundred-mile-a-day horse” Red-Hare.
Its chief characters are a Taoist hermit who becomes a master
tactician, named Zhuge Liang, the poet-general Cao Cao, and three men
who swear brotherhood by a peach tree: the warrior Zhang Fei, the
knight Guan Yu, and the nobleman Liu Bei, a descendant of the Han
dynastic line. For ten points, name this Luo Guanzhong novel
describing a third-century era of Chinese history. Mr. {White} [or
Lawrence “Larry” {Dimmick}] After jail terms for robbing a lumberyard
in Milwaukee in 1977 and being caught in a Los Angeles bordello in
1983, he moved up by killing Sacramento policeman John Dolenz at the
latter’s surprise birthday party. Known for his aversion to cats and
habit of carrying two guns, he once warned that anyone who shoots him
in a dream should apologize upon waking. Shortly after outlining how
to use amputation to persuade jewelry store managers to cooperate, he
kills Joe Cabot and, while dying from a shot fired by Nice Guy Eddie,
kills Mr. Orange when the latter reveals that he is an undercover cop.
FTP, name this character from Reservoir Dogs, played by Harvey Keitel.
View of {Toledo} [or {Toledo} at Night; or {Toledo} in a Storm] It
uses the same vantage point as its companion piece from the San José
commission, Saint Joseph and the Christ Child. The bell tower of the
cathedral is shown on the wrong side of Alcázar Palace in order to
create a juxtaposition symbolizing the centers of power, while the
Alcántara Bridge and a large rock dominate the widening of the river
in the mid-ground. The unnatural curvature of the skyline and the use
of violet and emerald colors lead many to compare this piece by a
noted Mannerist to later Impressionist works. For ten points, name
this El Greco landscape depicting the religious center of Spain.
George Gabriel {Stokes} His “inclination factor” removes backwards-
propagating waves from the Fresnel-Kirchhoff diffraction integral. The
spontaneous Raman Effect causes side bands named for him in Raman
spectra. His “parameters” describe the phase and polarization of
radiation. His “velocity” describes how fast a bubble will rise due to
convection. His “flow” occurs in a container with a Reynolds number
under one-half and a diameter over a hundred times that of an object
within. For ten points, name this man who created equations for non-
turbulent flow with Navier and whose namesake theorem generalizes
Green’s theorem, Gauss’s theorem, and the fundamental theorem of
calculus. {Kitchen Cabinet} After United States Telegraph editor Duff
Green left this group to change the paper’s editorial direction,
Francis Blair joined and founded the sympathetic Washington Globe. It
also included future New Hampshire governor Isaac Hill, Army major
William B. Lewis, and its leader, the Fourth Auditor of the Treasury
Amos Kendall. It became unnecessary after its chief antagonists,
Samuel Ingham and John Calhoun, resigned from the executive branch
over the Peggy Eaton and nullification controversies. For ten points,
name this group of unofficial advisers to Andrew Jackson which met in
a namesake room of the White House. “The {Bells}” [Award the points
and a dollar for an answer of “The {bells, bells, bells, bells, bells,
bells, bells}”] The people responsible for the title objects are
“Ghouls” who are “neither man nor woman… neither brute nor human.”
They variously foretell “a world of merriment,” “a world of
happiness,” “a tale of terror,” and “a world of solemn thought.”
Inspired by the author’s time living near the newly built University
Church at Fordham, this poem explores the use of the objects in “a
clamorous appealing to the mercy of the fire” or a “mellow wedding.”
For ten points, name these objects whose “moaning and groaning,” and
“tintinnabulation that so musically wells” were described by Edgar
Allen Poe. George Edward {Pickett} The brigades under his command were
almost annihilated at Five Forks because he had left the battlefield
to attend a fish bake, leading to his removal from command following
the Battle of Sayler’s Creek. Earlier, while commanding the brigades
of Kemper, Garnett, and Armistead, he joined with the divisions of
Pettigrew and Trimble and shouted “Up men and to your posts. Don’t
forget today that you are from Old Virginia!” Under the orders of
Longstreet, he then marched the division against Cemetery Ridge. For
ten points, name this officer who thus lost three fourths of his men
in an infamous “charge” at Gettysburg. {Wittig} reaction The Schlosser
modification of it quenches the betaines involved with a proton donor.
One of its chief uses is the production of olefins, easily synthesized
under mild conditions from triphenylphosphine resin by this process.
When the equilibration of erythro and threo betaines is accelerated,
this reaction becomes stereoselective in favor of the E-variety of the
double- bonded end product. For ten points, name this reaction which
uses carbonyl compounds and phosphorous ylids to form alkenes from
aldehydes or ketones. The {Alchemist} In its final act, a man returns
home to find “The ceiling fill’d with poesies of the candle, /And
‘Madam with a dildo’ writ o’ the walls.” An attempt to keep away
visitors by claiming that the cat had contracted the plague fails, and
all is revealed when Dapper chews through a gingerbread gag. Despite
the amusing antics of Epicure Mammon, Pertinax Surly, and Tribulation
Wholesome, Kastrill ends up infuriated when Dame Pliant becomes
engaged to Lovewit. For ten points, Dol Common, Face, and Subtle, the
titular pseudoscientist, take over a house in what Ben Jonson play?
Antiochus Rulers with this name included the seventh, nicknamed
"Euergetes Eusebes Soter Sidetes," the ninth, nicknamed "Philopater,
Cyzicenus," and the eighth, whose lengthy nickname translates as "god
manifest, loving his mother, gloriously victorious, hook-nosed." The
last of them was the thirteenth, who was killed by the prince of Emesa
in 67 B.C., while the first came to power after his father's murder in
280 and was on the losing side in the Damascene and First Syrian Wars.
FTP, give the common name of these Seleucid rulers, under the fourth
of whom, nicknamed "Epiphanes," the Jewish insurrection of the
Maccabees took place. The {Death of Ivan Ilyich} The title event
occurred on February 4, 1882, as three of the title character's
colleagues discover on the opening page. The title character is the
second son of a minor official, who joined the Court of Justice,
married Praskovya Fedorovna Mikhel, and slipped off a step-ladder
while showing his upholsterer how he wanted the curtains to hang, an
accident which would prove to be fatal. FTP, identify this short
novel, first published in 1886, which ends with the title character's
declaration that "Death is finished," and which was written by Leo
Tolstoy. {aldehyde}s Tests for them include Tollen's reagent, because
they reduce silver ions to metallic silver, and Fehling's test. Once
known as bisulphite addition compounds, they react with hydrogen
cyanide to form cyanohydrins and yield oximes, hydrazones, and
carbazones by condensation. FTP, identify this class of organic
compounds, which are formed by oxidation of primary alcohols and which
contain a carbonyl group with a hydrogen atom bound to the carbon
atom, such as methanal, HCOH. Telemachus One myth states that he
founded the city of Clusium, while another claims that was the father
of Perseptolis. Other traditions have him marrying Polycaste, the
daughter of Nestor, and fathering Homer with her, or possibly becoming
the father of Latinus after marrying a sorceress who had spent a year
with his father on the island of Aeaea (ey-ee-uh). FTP, name this
legenedary figure, who went to Pylus and Sparta with Athena, although
she was disguised as Mentor, before returning to Ithaca to help his
father, Odysseus, return to power. 6\. In 1620, Sir William Vaughn
sold him the southeastern peninsula of Newfoundland, for which he
secured a charter for a colony he called Avalon. When he visited in
1627, however, he decided that the climate was so bad that One myth
states that he founded the city of Clusium, while another claims that
was the father of Perseptolis. Other traditions have him marrying
Polycaste, the daughter of Nestor, and fathering Homer with her, or
possibly becoming the father of Latinus after marrying a sorceress who
had spent a year with his father on the island of Aeaea (ey-ee-uh).
FTP, name this legenedary figure, who went to Pylus and Sparta with
Athena, although she was disguised as Mentor, before returning to
Ithaca to help his father, Odysseus, return to power. the {Devonian}
period It is divided into seven stages, based on the remains of
invertebrate fossils such as crinoids, ammonoids, and brachiopods.
Named in 1839 by Murchison and Sedgwick, graptolites went extinct in
this period, which also saw the decline of trilobites and the
formation of large continental deposits of red silt and sandstone.
FTP, identify this geological period of the Paleozoic era, which began
about 395 million years ago and which came between the Silurian and
Carboniferous periods. Athol {Fugard} His Statements After an Arrest
under the Immorality Act is concerned with miscegenation. Many critics
consider 1969s Boesman and Lena to be his most powerful work. His
early plays include No-Good Friday, People are Living There, and The
Blood Knot. FTP, identify this playwright of The Road to Mecca, Master
Harold and the Boys, and Sizwe Bansi is Dead, considered the foremost
contemporary dramatist from South Africa. Eine {Kleine Nachtmusik} or
A {Little Night Music} The first movement is a marchlike Allegro, the
second is a lyrical Romanza, the third is a Minuet, and the fourth is
a Rondo. Because most of the composers serenades are in five
movements, it is believed that this work originally had another Minuet
which is now lost. FTP, identify this composition of 1787, Kochel
(ker-kull) number 525, written in the same year as Don Giovanni by
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. the {War of the Three Henrys} After this
war's battle of Coutras, the League of Sixteen was formed to provoke
the king's overthrow. After the "day of the barricades," the king fled
to Blois, from which he caused Cardinal Louis and one of his two chief
opponents to be killed, leading the Duke of Mayenne to lead a revolt.
FTP, identify this conflict, which ended with the murder of the king
by the mad monk Jacques ClŽment in 1589, the eighth religious war in
France which is named for its three principal combatants, all of whom
shared the same first name. Joseph {Priestley} In 1755, he became
minister at Needham Market, where he became known for The Scripture
Doctrine of Remission. In 1774, he accompanied Lord Shelburne to the
continent as a literary companion, at which time he published Letters
to a Philosophical Unbeliever, but when he returned to England his
Disquisition Relating to Matter and Spirit and History of Early
Opinions Concerning Jesus Christ led him to be called an atheist. FTP,
name this man, who came to America in 1794 after his reply to Burke's
Reflections on the French Revolution led a Birmingham mob to destroy
his house, best known for such scientific achievements as the
discovery of gases like nitrous oxide, carbon monoxide, and oxygen.
Charles Wright {Mills} In 1945, he began teaching at Columbia, where
he directed a section of the Bureau of Applied Social Research and
wrote The New Men of Power and White Collar. His Character and Social
Structure synthesized the Frankfurt School and social psychology,
while he turned on Lazarsfeld and Parsons in late works like The
Sociological Imagination. FTP, name this sociologist, who argued in
his best-known book that the postwar United States were ruled by a
hidden oligarchy which actually ruled the country, 1956's The Power
Elite. Camille {Pissarro} After going to Paris at the age of 25, he
studied under Corot, whose influence can be seen on his early works.
The only painter to exhibit works in all eight impressionist shows, he
did not gain fame until he was in his 60s, although he was the teacher
of Cassatt, Cezanne, and Gauguin. FTP, identify this painter, whose
most famous work depicts the Boulevard Montmartre by night, who was
born in the Virgin Islands, and whose name sounds like he was the
conquistador who overthrew the Incas. the {Ural} mountains The
northernmost section, or the Obdorsk, begins at Kara Bay and includes
Khard-yues and Pae-yer. The middle section begins with the Denezhkin
Kamen in the north and ends with the Tara-tash in the south, after
which it becomes three parallel chains. FTP, identify this mountain
range, which is known as the Obshchiy Syrt near the Volga river, and
which runs north-south from the Arctic Ocean to the Caspian Sea,
separating Europe >from Asia. Charles {Wheatstone} He invented a
stereoscope, patented the concertina, and did work on the theory of
resonance of columns of air. Along with Cooke, he worked on an
electric telegraph project, an interest which led to his inventions of
the printing and single-needle telegraphs. FTP, name this professor of
experimental physics at King's College, London, whose name is attached
to a device, which was actually invented by Christie, that uses Ohm's
law to compare resistance, now known as his bridge. Niccolo
{Machiavelli} After the fall of Savonarola, he was named secretary to
the Council of Ten and head of the Second Chancery. After the Holy
League attacked his city, he was arrested for conspiracy against the
new government and tortured, forcing him to withdraw from public life.
FTP, identify this Italian statesman, who turned instead to writing,
producing such works as Mandragola, the Discourses on Livy, and a
little book which was first published in 1532 and was dedicated to the
Medicis who ruled Florence, The Prince. {Pedro II} Under his rule, the
Rio Branco law, which stated that the children of slaves should be
free, was followed by the freeing of slaves from Ceara province and,
in 1888, complete emancipation without compensation. Along with the
unpopularity of Gaston d'OrlŽans, the husband of his daughter
Isabella, this liberalization led to an army revolt under General
Manoel Deodoro da Fonseca, who deposed him in 1889 and proclaimed a
republic. FTP, identify this ruler, whose father abdicated in his
favor when he was just five years old, who ruled for 49 years as king
of Brazil. Johannes {Gutenberg} Whether or not Laurens Janszoon
actually preceded him to his most famous invention, it seems likely
that he was not actually the first one to do it. His works include the
Fragment of the Last Judgment, an edition of Aelius Donatus, and the
42 line bible for which he is best known today. FTP, identify this
German, whose work was financed by Johannes Fust until 1455, who is
regarded in the West as the inventor of printing. Jons Jakob
{Berzelius} His first accomplishment was to confirm the law of
definite proportions formulated by Proust by showing that it held in
over 2,000 cases. He prepared the first accurate table of atomic
weights, a task which prompted him to propose that the initial letter
of an element's Latin name should be used as its symbol. FTP, name
this chemist, who coined such terms as isomer, allotrope, and
catalysis, and who discovered the elements silicon, thorium, and
selenium. {Pierre}, or the Ambiguities In the end, he kills himself in
prison, having caused the deaths of the three women who are most dear
to him. He is a writer who abandons his mother and his fiancŽe, Lucy
Tartan, in order to safeguard Isabel, whom he believes to be his
illegitimate sister. FTP, identify the title character of this 1852
novel, which tells the story of the Glendinning family, a work
subtitled or the Ambiguities and written by Herman Melville. the
{graviton} In order to detect them, Joseph Weber devised an experiment
in which aluminum cylinders were suspended in a vacuum chamber, on the
assumption that waves created by these particles would displace them.
In 1969, Weber claimed that he had discovered waves produced by these
particles, bosons with a spin of 2, no mass, and no charge, but his
results could not be reproduced. FTP, identify this particle, which
must be much weaker than the photon, since the force is carries is
much weaker than the electromagnetic force. Henry {Moore} Toward the
end of his life he became interested in lithography, and produced such
series as Auden, Stonehenge, and Elephant Skull. His postwar works
include King and Queen, Warrior with Shield, Family Group, and Nuclear
Energy, which is located at the University of Chicago. FTP, identify
this British sculptor, best known for his massive primitivist works,
including a number of sculptures of reclining figures. Nikos
{Kazantzakis} He translated the Divine Comedy and Goethes Faust into
his native language, and wrote a 33,333 line sequel to one of the best
known epic poems of his own tongue. He studied under Henri Bergson,
and his philosophical interests are evident in Freedom or Death, Toda
Raba, and Report to Greco. FTP, identify this author, who never won
the Nobel Prize, but who did write The Odyssey: A Modern Sequel, The
Greek Passion, The Last Temptation of Christ, and Zorba the Greek. The
{Phenomenology of Spirit} or {Phanomenologie des Geistes} It
concludes, in paragraph number 808, with a quote from Schiller stating
that only from the chalice of this realm of spirits foams forth for
Him his own infinitude. After the introduction on scientific
cognition, it includes sections on consciousness, self-consciousness,
reason, religion, and absolute knowing. FTP, identify this
philosophical work, which was written as an introduction to the system
set forth in the Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences, a work
first published in 1807 by Hegel. Albrecht von {Wallenstein} He was
awarded the titles of Duke of Mecklenburg and General of the Baltic
and Oceanic Seas. Two years after his greatest victory, and four years
after he was first dismissed from his position as Commander of the
Imperial armies, he was killed at Eger by Irish mercenaries. FTP,
identify this Bohemian general, who was assassinated in 1634, after
his victory at Lutzen in which Gustavus Adolphus had been killed.
James {Parkinson} He was a founding member of the Geological Society
of London, and his books on the subject include Outlines of Oryctology
and Organic Remains of a Former World. He argued that coal was
produced by the "bituminous fermentation" of plants, but he is better
known for his medical work, which include a definitive treatise on
gout and what may be the first English description of appendicitis.
FTP, identify this scientist, whose 1817 An Essay on the Shaking Palsy
gave the classic description of the neurological disorder now named
for him. Robert {Southey} In 1801, he wrote Thalada the Destroyer, a
verse epic set in the Orient, which was followed by Madoc, the story
of the South American adventures of the son of the medieval Welsh king
Owen Gwyneth. Caractured as Mr. Feathernest in Peacock's Melincourt,
his late works include A Tale of Paraguay, Lives of the British
Admirals, and A Vision of Judgment, all written after he succeeded
Henry Pye as Poet Laureate. FTP, name this Lake poet, Coleridge's
brother-in- law who is best known for his "Battle of Blenheim." Yemen
It controls the islands of Al-Ikhwan, Abd Al-Kuri, and Socotra, which
lies to the southeast of the country. There isnt much in the eastern
portion of this nation, which is dominated by the Hadramawt desert,
but the city of Al-Ghaydah does sit on the shore of the Ghubbat al-
Qamar. FTP, identify this country, which lies to the east of the Bab
el Mandeb from Djibouti, as well as to the north of the Gulf of Aden
from Somalia, whose capital is at Sana and which borders Saudi Arabia
and Oman. John Paul {Jones} While commanding the merchant ship John on
a voyage to Tobago, he beat a sailor to death, leading him to be impr
isoned for murder; after he was released on bail, he made another trip
to Tobago in an attempt to clear his name, and accidentally killed a
mutinous sailor. He would later command the Alfred, the Providence,
and the Ranger, and after distinguished service became the only naval
officer to receive a Congressional gold medal. FTP, identify this man,
who was in Denmark when he accepted an offer to become a rear admiral
in the Russian navy, better known for an engagement of the night of
September 23, 1778, in which he defeated the Serapis as commander of
the Bonhomme Richard. Tammuz Under the name Sibzianna he was
identified with Orion, and kings of the Dungi and Isin dynasties
associated themselves with this god. Also known as umun mursi, or lord
of the flood, Zulumma, or god of the date, and Dumu-zi, or the
faithful son, his aspect of Ningiszida, or Lord of the faithful tree,
eventually developed into a distinct deity. FTP, identify this god,
whose loving sister would descend into Aralu every year to bring him
back to earth, and who in Sumerian, Babylonian and Assyrian myth is
associated with Innini or Ishtar. humus The mor variety is usually
acidic and found in coniferous forests, while the mull type is
alkaline and found in deciduous forests and grasslands. The different
kinds are differentiated according to the vegetation from which they
derive, the organisms involved in their production, and the degree to
which they are part of the mineral soil. FTP, identify this kind of
organic matter, which is largely carbon and nitrogen, which is
produced by bacteria decomposing living material and which is used to
improve the fertility of soil. Alan Alexander {Milne} After serving in
World War I as a signals officer, he began writing plays, including
Wurzel-Flummery, The Truth About Blayds, and Mr. Pim Passes By. His
later works include a mystery, The Fourth Wall, novels like Chloe
Marr, and Toad of Toad Hall, an adaptation of Kenneth Grahame'sThe
Wind and the Willows, but he is better known as a children's writer.
FTP, name this English author of When We Were Very Young, Now We Are
Six, and The House at Pooh Corner. Melanie {Griffith} She broke a leg
and an arm after being hit by a car while crossing Sunset Boulevard in
1980, but her doctor claimed that she would have been killed if she
hadn't been drunk. The next year, she was clawed in the face by a
lioness during the filming of Roar. On her sixth birthday, Alfred
Hitchcock gave her a wodden coffin containing a wax doll of her
mother, who had appeared in The Birds. FTP, name this daughter of
Tippi Hedren, who was married to Steven Bauer in between marriages to
a man she moved in with when she was 14 years old, Don Johnson. Iris
She was the daughter of the titan Thaumus and Electra, the daughter of
Oceanus. The sister of the Harpies, she would rest at the side of
Hera's couch, never untying her sandals so she could leave at a
moment's notice. FTP, name this messenger of the gods, who filled the
clouds with moisture and who traveled on the rainbow. Protesilaus 10
points: After he died, his wife Laodameia had a wooden statue of him
made which she wept over until her father Acastus burned it. Later,
Hermes brought her husband back from Hades to visit her, and she
returned to the underworld with him.  5 points: According to an
oracle, the first Greek who went ashore at Troy would be killed, but
that didnt stop this son of Iphiclus from jumping ashore. The
{Varieties of Religious Experience} The genesis of this work came in
1899, when the author got lost in the Adirondacks, and wandered around
without food for 13 hours. While recovering from this traumatic
experience, the author decided to accept an invitation to go to
Scotland and deliver the Gifford Lectures, and the book consists of
the 20 lectures, which are on such diverse topics as "The reality of
the unseen," "The divided self," "Saintliness," "Mysticism," and
"Philosophy." FTP, identify this work, which proposed a pluralistic
view of religion, written by William James. Sir Humphrey {Davy} After
reading a textbook by Lavoisier (la-vwa-zee-ay), he decided to become
a chemist, but his first experimental work was an attempt to disprove
Lavoisier's caloric theory of heat. In the course of his work on
gases, he inhaled four quarts of hydrogen and tried to breathe pure
carbon dioxide, but he became famous for his experiments with nitrous
oxide, which became a recreational drug thanks to his paper on its
intoxicating properties. FTP, name this British scientist, who named
chlorine, isolated sodium and potassium, and invented an arc lamp, but
is best known for his discovery of a young assistant whose fame
eclipsed his, Michael Faraday. Emma She feels isolated after her
governess, Miss Taylor, leaves to marry Mr. Weston. After Robert
Martin, a tenant of George Knightley, proposes to Harriet Smith, this
title character forces her to turn him down, pushing her toward a
marriage with a clergyman, Mr. Elton. FTP, identify this novel,
published in 1816, in which the title character believes that she
loves Frank Churchill, written by Jane Austen and recently adapted
into a film starring Gynneth Paltrow. {magnetic monopole}s In 1982,
Blas Cabrera spent four months observing a superconductive niobium
coil before detecting what may have been one of these passing through
it. Eight years earlier, Alexander Polyakov and Gerald t Hooft
independently determined that grand unified theories showed that these
must exist and that they must be incredibly massive. FTP, identify
these curious entities, whose existence would require all electric
charges to be exact multiples of a smallest charge, as was shown in
1931 by Paul Dirac. Nevil {Shute} He worked as an engineer at the
Howden Airship Works, and integrated his professional work into his
writing in works like No Highway and his autobiography, Slide Rule.
Born in 1899 with the last name Norway, he also wrote Marazan, What
Happened to the Corbetts, and Ruined City, and eventually moved to
Langwarria, Australia, which became the setting of his best known
work. FTP, name this British writer of The Breaking Wave, A Town Like
Alice, and On the Beach. {Jehovahs Witnesses} It received its name
from Judge Joseph Rutherford, who succeeded the founder as president.
They are considered to be Arians, because they believe that Christ was
the first created being, that his body remained dead after the
Resurrection, and that Satan rules the world. FTP, identify this
religious movement, whose leaders proclaimed that the world would end
in 1975, which was founded in 1872 by Pastor Charles Taze Russell, and
whose publication is The Watchtower. Hans Christian {Oersted} He wrote
his dissertation on the importance of Kantian philosophy to science,
but his academic career was derailed for a time by his outspoken
support of the natural philosophy of Ritter and Winterl. In his magnum
opus, Researches on the Identity of Chemical and Electric Forces, he
tried to explain the neutralization of acids and bases through
attraction and repulsion, and predicted the electromagnetic effect.
FTP, identify this scientist, the discoverer of aluminum who was
giving a lecture in 1820 when he accidentally discovered that a
current-carrying wire actually is surrounded by a magnetic field. the
{Canary} Islands The westernmost of them is Hierro, whose largest city
is Valverde, while the easternmost is Lanzarote. The others include
Gomera, Fuerteventura, and La Palma, in addition to the two central
and largest islands. FTP, identify this island group, whose largest
cities include La Orotava, Arucas, and Santa Cruz de Tenerife, which
is owned by Spain and which lies to the west of Morocco. Ana•s {Nin}
The daughter of a Spanish composer, she moved from New York to Paris
in 1923, where she became a psychoanalyst under the training of Otto
Rank. Her first published work was an unprofessional study of D. H.
Lawrence, and her fiction includes Solar Baroque, Children of the
Albatross, Under a Glass Bell, and The Four-Chambered Heart. FTP,
identify this author of erotica such as Delta of Venus, best known for
her diary and her relationship with Henry Miller. the {Ryder Cup} A
figure modeled on Abe Mitchell, a friend of the man after whom it is
named, stands atop a cup 16 inches high. It was donated by its
namesake, an English seed merchant, in 1927, and after fifty years of
biennial competition the format changed to include Europeans. FTP,
identify this trophy, which goes to the PGA headquarters of the
winning side, and which is competed for by teams of golfers from the
United States and Europe. the {Washington} Armament Conference The
impetus for it came >from a resolution introduced by Senator Borah
which was appended to a Naval Appropriations Bill. As a consequence of
it, American cable rights on the island of Yap were confirmed, Kiachow
and the Shantung peninsula were given to China, and the German cable
lines in the Pacific were split between six nations. FTP, identify
this conference, which was chaired by Charles Evans Hughes, which
guaranteed Chinas independence and set limits on the sizes of navies.
the {liver} The Babylonians believed that it was where the soul
resided in the body, and used them to determine the will of the gods.
Plato put the lowest division of the soul into this organ, while Galen
claimed that it converted food into blood. FTP, identify this organ,
which converts glucose to glycogen, stores and breaks down fats,
breaks excess amino acids down to ammonia, and produces bile. the
{Zimmermann Note} or the {Zimmermann Telegram} On February 24, a copy
of it was given to Walter Hines Page, and it was released to the press
a week later. It was dated January 19 and addressed to Minister von
Eckhardt, who was told to get Japan to switch sides, as well as
instructed to propose an alliance. FTP, identify this document, named
for the foreign secretary who sent it in code in 1917, which offered
New Mexico, Texas and Arizona to Mexico if that country would join the
German side. {I and Thou} or {Ich und Du} The world is twofold for man
in accordance with his twofold attitude, begins this work. At the end
of the third and final part, the author states that the God-side of
the event whose world-side is called return is called redemption. FTP,
identify this philosophical work, first published in 1922, which
argues that the relationships created by religion must be
differentiated from objective relations between subject and object,
the best known work of Martin Buber. {aromatic}ity In 1890, Bamberger
proposed that it was associated with six residual valencies in each
molecule, an idea which was given an electronic interpretation by
Robinson. According to molecular orbital theory, it requires a planar
molecule with a cyclic pi orbital having four n plus two pi electrons,
and the measure of it is the extent of pi electron delocalization.
FTP, identify this term from organic chemistry, which refers to
compounds like pyridine, napthalene and benzene, and which was given
because the oils they constituted had a pleasant smell. Hokkaido
According to an episode of The Simpsons, its sacred woods are home to
many soap factories. The Nemuro Strait separates it from a disputed
island group to the east, the Perouse Strait separates it from a
peninsula to the north, and the Tsugaro-kaikyo strait separates it
>from the rest of its country to the south. FTP, identify this island,
whose cities include Hakodate, Wakkanai, and Sapporo, the northernmost
island of Japan. Ambrose {Burnside} Although he designed a new breech-
loading carbine, his firearms company in Bristol went bankrupt, and he
was working for the Illinois Central Railroad at the outbreak of the
Civil War. He led an amphibious expeditionary force on the North
Carolina coast, capturing Roanoke Island and New Bern before he was
transferred to the Army of the Potomac, where he commanded the left
wing at Antietam. FTP, identify this Union general, who resigned after
being blamed for the defeat at the battle of the Crater, a governor of
Rhode Island better known as the general who replaced McClellan in
November, 1862, only to be defeated by Lee the next month at the
battle of Fredericksburg. Moloch In Book II of Paradise Lost, he is
the first fallen angel to respond to Satan, and is described as the
strongest and the fiercest Spirit / That fought in Heaven. Toward the
end of the Assyrian rule, he was worshiped outside Jerusalem in the
valley of Hinnom at Topheth, and King Ahaz offered his own son to this
god as a burnt offering. FTP, identify this deity, whose name is a
corruption of the Semitic word for king, whose cult was a perversion
of Judaism which required the sacrifice of firstborn infants. The
{Heart is a Lonely Hunter} Willie is sentenced to prison for stabbing
a man, and loses both feet from gangrene after being trussed up for
three days for attempting to escape. Biff Brannon, the owner of the
New York Cafe, takes an interest in Jake Blount, who had wanted to be
an evangelist before settling for work as a laborer. Micks party is
destroyed after she walks off with Harry and the neighborhood children
wreck the place. FTP, identify the novel in which all of these scenes
occur, which also features two mutes, published in 1940 by Carson
McCullers. Heinrich {Olbers} He believed that his finest
accomplishment was having convinced Bessel to become an astronomer.
Until his retirement in 1820, he worked as an ophthalmologist in
Bremen, but in his spare time he discovered Pallas and Vesta,
calculated the orbit of Bode's comet, and developed a new method for
calculating parabolic orbits. FTP, name this scientist, who in 1823
published his speculation that space is not entirely transparent, an
explanation of a paradox about the dark night sky which is named for
him. Claude {Debussy} After he ended his affair with Gabrielle Dupont,
she tried to kill herself with poison, while his first wife, Rosalie
Texier, shot herself in the chest after he announced that he was tired
of their marriage. His compositions include unfinished operas based on
Poes The Devil in the Belfry and The Fall of the House of Usher,
incidental music for King Lear, the Prix de Rome winning cantata The
Prodigal Son, and piano works such as Estampes, Pour le piano, Suite
bergamasque, and Childrens Corner. FTP, name this French composer,
best known for such Impressionist works as Images, La Mer and Prelude
to the Afternoon of a Faun. Lydia The first ruler of this kingdom was
known to the Assyrians as Guggu of Luddu, and was killed fighting off
Cimmerian raiders. His son Ardys took power around 652 B.C., and
conquered an area ranging from the Halys River to the Greek coastal
cities of Asia Minor. FTP, identify this kingdom, whose capital was at
Sardis, which became a satrapy of the Persian Empire in 546 B.C. when
Cyrus defeated its last king, Croesus. The {Romance of the Three
Kingdoms} or {Sanguozhi yanyi} Its characters includes Zhuge Liang;
Zhang Fei; Liu Bei, a dynastic founder; and Guan Yu, who would later
become the god Guan Di. It also features the villaneous General Cao
Cao, the founder of Wei, who is opposed by the Brothers of the Peach
Orchard. FTP, identify this novel, which was first published around
1522, but which was standardized in the seventeenth century by Mao
Zonggang, and which is set in the aftermath of the collapse of the Han
dynasty. Robert {Millikan} During the 1920's, he worked on the hot
spark spectra, and with I. S. Bowen he identified over 1,000 new lines
of the ultraviolet spectra of light elements. Toward the end of his
career, he did research on cosmic rays, a term which he coined, but he
is better known for such early work as his confirmation of Einstein's
photoelectric equation. FTP, identify this American scientist, who won
the 1923 Nobel Prize in Physics for his 1909 experiment measuring the
charge of the electron. {Simon} Magus In a short story by Danilo Kis,
he flies into the air to prove a point, but then plummets to a grisly
death. He wrote a book entitled The Root of All in which he argued
that fire was the central element which gave rise to six principles
out of which the universe is made, and which join on earth in a
harmony known as hestos. FTP, identify this Samarian, a rival of
Christ who was known as the father of the heretics and more simply as
the magician. Karl von {Frisch} He began his scientific career with
work on sudden color changes in fish, and disputed with the director
of the Munich eye clinic over the ability of fish to see colors. In
his best known work, published in such books as The Dancing Bees, he
showed how bees used intricate dances to tell each other where they
could find food. FTP, name this Austrian, who shared a Nobel Prize in
1973 with Tinbergen and Lorenz, and who is considered a founder of
ethology. The {Venus of Urbino} It appears in the center of Johann
Zoffanys Cognoscenti in the Uffizi, in which a man in a white wig
holds it from behind while a man in black stands next to it holding
one of the corners. The woman of the title wears a bracelet on her
right arm and is holding aunch of flowers in her right hand, one of
which has fallen to the bed, while in the background a woman in a red
dress looks on as a maid in white looks into a chest. FTP, identify
this painting of 1538, which also features a lapdog sleeping at the
foot of the bed, a reclining female nude painted by Titian.
{phlebotomy} (accept {bloodletting}) In 1835, Pierre Louis showed that
it had no effect on three of the diseases for which it was commonly
prescribed. Earlier, it had been advocated by F. J. V. Broussais and
Benjamin Rush, who thought that all diseases were caused by unnatural
tension. FTP, identify this medical practice, which was employed by
the Hippocratics for inflammatory conditions which had an excess of a
certain humor, and which generally involved a lancet or a leech.
Hieronymous Karl Friedrich, Baron {Münchhausen} His stories were first
compiled in 1785 by Rudolf Raspe, who was forced to flee his job as
curator of a museum at Cassel after being accused of embezzlement. A
later edition was published under the title Gulliver Revived, and Karl
Immermann later wrote a satire with him as the hero. FTP, name this
German soldier, who served as a cavalry officer in the Russian army
during the Turkish campaign of 1737 to 1739, who became notorious for
his exaggerated tales of his adventures, and who later became the
subject of a film directed by Terry Gilliam. Lorenzo {Valla} He was
ordained a priest in 1431, the same year he wrote De voluptate, a
dialogue in praise of sensual pleasure. While in the service of King
Alfonso V of Aragon, he was attacked by the Inquisition for such works
as a comparison of the Vulgate Bible and the Greek New Testament and
for the Declamatio of 1440, which argued against the Popes temporal
power. FTP, identify this humanist, who was recalled to Rome by Pope
Nicholas V to become a professor of eloquence, but who is best
remembered for having proven the falsity of a document which allegedly
gave the church control of Western Europe, the Donation of
Constantine. Charles George Chinese {Gordon} After thiry-three
battles, his Ever Victorious Army subdued the Taiping rebels, and the
emperor made him a mandarin of the first class. In 1877, he was
created a pasha by the khedive of Egypt after serving as governor of
the equatorial provinces of central Africa. FTP, name this Englishman,
who was profiled in Eminent Victorians, and who was sent to the Sudan
in 1884 and killed when the Mahdi stormed Khartoum. Matthew {Lewis} He
wrote plays, such as The Wood Demon and The Castle Spectre, and
several volumes of verse, although his best poem, Alonzo the Brave and
the Fair Imogene, appeared in one of his novels. Author of The Bravo
of Venice and Feudal Tyrants, he gave up writing after his fathers
death in 1812, devoting himself to the familys sugar plantations in
the West Indies. FTP, identify this English writer, who was a 19 year
old attache at the British Embassy in the Hague when he wrote his most
successful work, the Gothic novel The Monk. the battle of {Midway}
Island The first four American attacks only resulted in the loss of 65
aircraft, but in the fifth attack, the Akagi, Soryu and Kaga were sunk
by dive bombers. It began when Admiral Nagumo's fleet was opposed by
two task forces led by Fletcher and Spruance, and ended on June 5,
after the Hammann and Yorktown had been sunk. FTP, identify this naval
battle of 1942, the turning point of the war in the Pacific which was
fought near an island 1,000 miles west of Hawaii. James Clerk
{Maxwell} His first paper was on a new way of constructing a perfect
oval, and his early work included the discovery of the fish-eye lens
and a proof that all colors can be matched by mixtures of three
spectral stimuli. His work on Saturn's rings, which disproved
Laplace's belief that there was one solid ring, led to his kinetic
theory of gases, a statistical theory of distribution which tied in
with Boltzmann's work on the same subject. FTP, identify this British
physicist, whose Theory of Heat introduced a being which was able to
operate valves without doing work, the sorting demon named for him.
the {Zambezi} river It widens above Kakengi, below which are rapids
leading into the Suapuma cataracts. After the Kabompo and Lungwebungu
join it, it meets up with the Kwando before crossing the East African
escarpment, dropping from the Kebrabasa Rapids to the Indian Ocean.
FTP, identify this river, the fourth- longest in Africa, which was
explored by David Livingstone, whose middle portion includes the
Victoria Falls. {Jerusalem Liberated} or {Gerusalemme liberata} The
year after it was finished, the poet wrote an Allegory of it in which
he defended his use of magic against the objections of Silvio
Antoniano. After Celio Malespini published fourteen of its cantos
under the title of its main character in 1580, the author decided to
publish the whole thing himself, and it became so popular that he
wrote a new, morally proper version of it. FTP, identify this epic
poem in twenty cantos, which is set in 1099 and depicts the army led
by Godfrey of Bouillon during the First Crusade, the masterpiece of
Torquato Tasso. Mikhail {Glinka} After traveling through Spain in the
1840s, he wrote two Spanish overtures, Jota Aragonesa and Summer Night
in Madrid. 20 years before he wrote his first opera, Caterino Cavos
had written an opera on the same event, the rescue of a royal figure
by a peasant, Ivan Susanin. FTP, identify this composer, whose second
opera features the earliest use of the whole-tone scale in an opera,
whose works include A Life for the Tsar and Ruslan and Ludmilla and
who is known as the father of Russian music. the {cloud chamber} A
simplified version of this device was developed in 1950 by Cowan,
Needels, and Nielsen. They used a row of felt strips soaked in alcohol
to achieve supersaturation, cooling the lower part of the chamber with
solid carbon dioxide. FTP, identify this device, whose diffusion type
superseded the earlier expansion model, which was a chamber containing
air and ethanol vapor, invented in 1911 by C.T.R. Wilson, used to make
the paths of particles of ionizing radiation visible. John {Watson} He
began his career studying how animals learn, and did work with Lashley
on bird navigation. In 1920 he made a child, little Albert, afraid of
a rat he had previously liked, and then cured the phobia by exposing
the child to the rat gradually. FTP, identify this man, who went to
work for the John Walter Thomson advertising agency after being forced
to leave Johns Hopkins in a divorce scandal, who gave a series of
lectures at Columbia in 1912 which may be said to have founded
behaviorism. Jimmy {Buffett} When four Cuban exiles swam up to his
house in 1991, he turned them over to the police after serving them
refreshments. In 1987, he wrote The Jolly Man with his eight-year old
daughter. Five years before that, he sued the Florida Audubon Society
in order to wrest control of the Save the Manatee Club away from them.
FTP, name this musician, whose first album was 1970's Down to Earth,
best known for such frat-boy favorites as "Cheeseburger in Paradise"
and Tales from Margaritaville. Alcuin He was a poet and was assumed to
have written The Contest of Winter and Spring and Farewell to My Cell.
After Aelbert became archbishop of York, he became head of the school
there, and wrote a long poem in hexameter verse describing great men
of Yorkish history before moving to Aachen. FTP, identify this man,
who introduced the sung creed, edited the Latin Vulgate, and
encouraged study of the liberal arts, as well as the Carolingian
miniscule, as abbot of the monastery at Tours and director of the
Palace School for Charlemagne. Donato {Bramante} After the French
invaded Lombardy in 1499, he fled to Rome, where his first work was a
cloister at Santa Maria della Pace. He redesigned a church in Milan to
look like a Latin cross, faking a chancel with trompe loeil painting
and building the first dome with a coffered interior in modern times.
FTP, identify this Renaissance architect, a native of Urbino who
proposed a massive Greek cross when he was asked in 1503 by Pope
Julius II to design a building plan for Saint Peters. the {Hyksos} The
first of this line of rulers was Salatis, who was followed by Beon,
Apachnas, Apophis, Jannas and Asses. After they had ruled for 511
years, a rebellion broke out, resulting in their confinement by
Misphragmuthosis at Avaris, and their eventual expulsion by Thutmosis.
FTP, identify these shepherd kings, who, according to Manetho, ruled
as the 15th, 16th, and 17th dynasties of Egypt. Sir John {Suckling} He
served under Gustavus Adolphus at the battle of Breitenfeld, and when
war broke out with Scotland, he raised a cavalry troop at his own
expense to fight. A member of the Long Parliament, he fled to France
in 1642, where he probably committed suicide. However, he is better
known as an author, who was described as natural, easy [BLANK] in The
Way of the World not so much on the basis of plays like The Goblins
and Aglaura as for his lyrical poetry. FTP, name this writer of A
Session of the Poets, A Ballad Upon a Wedding, and Why so pale and
wan, fond lover?, a Cavalier poet who, according to Aubrey, invented
the game of cribbage. Roland {Barthes} (bart) His late work includes
The Grain of the Voice, The Rustle of Language, A Lovers Discourse,
which describes a failed affair, and Incidents, which was published
posthumously and revealed that he was homosexual. He wrote books on
Michelet and Racine, the latter of which was attacked by
traditionalists who thought his new critical mode would destroy
classic texts by reducing them to a network of signs. FTP, identify
this literary critic, the first chair of literary semiology at the
Collge de France whose better known works include The Eiffel Tower,
Mythologies, Writing Degree Zero, and S/Z. Linus {Pauling} He argued
that sickle-cell anemia was caused by a change in the normal amino
acid level of hemoglobin, and his X-ray studies of amino acids led him
to propose two basic protein structures, the pleated sheet and alpha-
helix. While a graduate student at Cal Tech, he developed a method for
determining the sizes of atoms in crystals, which eventually allowed
him to determine the structures of silicates. FTP, name this chemist,
who introduced the concepts of bond hybridization, electronegativity,
and resonance, but may be better known for his faith in vitamin C and
his two Nobel Prizes. the {Wilmot Proviso} Although it has been
credited to an Ohioan named Jacob Brinkerhoff, it is named for a
Democrat from northern Pennsylvania. When it failed in the Senate, the
Congressman after whom it is named adapted a bill proposed by Preston
King in its place, which was passed as an amendment to the Three
Million Bill. FTP, identify this controversial amendment, originally
proposed on August 8, 1846, which stated that any land acquired from
Mexico would have to be free of slavery. Edmund {Husserl} Frege (FREY-
guh) claimed that the mixture of subjective and objective in this mans
first book, On the Concept of Number, produced an impenetrable fog. He
moved away from the concept of a disembodied ego in 1931s Cartesian
Meditations, but he employed a Cartesian understanding of the self in
his best known work, Logical Investigations. FTP, identify this German
philosopher, a student of Brentano who influenced Merleau-Ponty and
Heidegger, considered the founder of phenomenology. David {Hume} 15
points: Two years after all of his writings were put on the index of
forbidden books, he went to France, where he unsuccessfully tried to
win the hand of the Countess of Boufflers, the mistress of the Prince
of Conti.  10 points: He worked as tutor to the insane marquess of
Annandale and as secretary to his relative, General James Sinclair,
before becoming a librarian in Edinburgh.  5 points: This British
philosophers masterpiece was A Treatise of Human Nature. Karl
{Weierstrass} 10 points: After failing law school, he studied under
Gudermann at Munster, and spent the next 15 years teaching in tiny
Prussian villages before gaining fame for a paper on Abelian
integrals.  5 points: He is best known for his rigorous definitions of
convergence, limits, and other analytic concepts. Walker {Percy} His
Lancelot describes a man who ends up committing arson, while Love in
the Ruins is a satire about an anti-materialistic scientist. The Last
Gentleman is a comic story of a Southerner who returns home, though
its sequel, Second Coming, is a darker work. FTP, name this author of
The Thanatos Syndrome, whose first novel told the story of a
stockbroker from New Orleans whose involvement with his cousin Kate
during Mardi Gras brings him back to the real world, 1961s The
Moviegoer. {Edward} the {Confessor} He lived in exile in Normandy
before entering the court of his half- brother, Hardaknut, who he
succeeded to the throne. During his reign, he rebuilt Westminster
Abbey in the Romanesque style, and was canonized in 1161, less than
one hundred years after his death. FTP, identify this son of Ethelred
the Unready, who nominated Harold II to be his successor, the last
king of the Old English line. Paul {Hindemith} His religious works
include a song cycle on the life of Mary and a ballet, Nobilissima
visione, inspired by Saint Francis of Assisi. His early works, such as
the play for Burmese marionettes entitled Das Nusch-Nuschi, were
satirical, but he developed a concern for writing practical music
which could be played at home by amateur musicians. FTP, identify this
German composer, whose strong opposition to totalitarianism led him,
in 1935, to write an opera about an artist leading a rebellion against
authority, Mathis der Maler. {Being and Time} The first translation of
this work into English was finished in 1962 by John Macquarrie and
Edward Robinson, though it has recently been superceded by a version
by Joan Stambaugh. It begins by stating that the question of being has
today been forgotten, and proceeds to insist on the ontological and
ontical priority of the question. FTP, identify this work, an analysis
of Dasein (dah-zein) and temporality which was written in 1927 by
Martin Heidegger. Edward Morgan {Forster} His lesser known works
include The Life to Come and The Eternal Moment, collections of short
stories; Abinger Harvest and Two Cheers for Democracy, essay
collections; and a history of Alexandria which he wrote while
stationed there with the Red Cross during World War I. However, he is
better known as a novelist, whose works include The Longest Journey
and a depiction of homosexuality which wasnt published until 1971,
Maurice. FTP, identify this English author of The Celestial Omnibus,
Where Angels Fear to Tread, Howards End, and A Passage to India. Henry
Lewis {Stimson} In 1910, he ran unsuccessfully as the Republican
candidate for governor of New York, and after a stint in the cabinet
he served as a colonel of field artillery during World War I. After
serving President Coolidge as a special representative to Nicaragua,
he spent two years as governor-general of the Philippines, and went on
to chair American delegations to the London Naval Conference and the
Geneva Disarmament Conference. FTP, identify this statesman, the first
American to serve in the cabinets of four Presidents, as Secretary of
War under Taft, State under Hoover, and War again under F.D.R. and
Truman. the Venerable {Bede} Born in 673, he studied under Saint
Ceolfirth and Saint Benedict Biscop, and went on to write 25 biblical
commentaries, numerous lives of the saints, and translations,
including one of the Gospel of John which, according to legend, he
dictated the final sentence of just before his death. FTP, name this
man, who spent most of his life as a monk at Jarrow in Northumbria,
the only English Doctor of the Church who is best known for his
Historia Ecclesiastica and his venerable title. the {Galapagos}
Islands (accept the Archipelago de {Colon}) The Pinta and the Santa
Maria, but not the Ni–a. Santa Cruz, San Cristobal, and San Salvador,
as well as Fernandina and Isabela. The aforementioned group of islands
also includes a volcano named Wolf and the cities of Villamil and
Puerto Baquerizo Moreno. FTP, identify this group of Pacific Islands,
which lies on the Equator, belongs to Ecuador, and which is most
famous as an archipelago visited by a British naturalist in the
nineteenth century. the {Edda}s One of them was discovered around 1643
by Bishop Sveinsson, who wrongly believed it to be the work of Saemund
Sigfusson. The other one is in five parts, and includes a metrical
analysis called the Hattatal, a collection of rules of prosody called
the Skalda, and legends of the gods known as the sayings of Bragi.
FTP, identify these collections of mythology, written between the
ninth and twelfth centuries and in the early thirteenth century, and
known as the Poetic and Prose or the Elder and Younger.
{Dinoflagellata} or {dinoflagellate}s Some species, including
Noctiluca miliaris, are bioluminescent. Most of them are
photoautotrophs, containing both brown xanthophyll pigment and
chlorophyll, and they generally have a rigid cellulose cell wall
covered with silica. FTP, identify this phylum of single-celled
organisms, part of the kingdom Protoctista, which are often found in
plankton and which typically use two long whiplike structures to move
around. the {Mamluk}s or {Mameluke}s The Bahri line began with Shajar
al-Durr in 1250, and was followed by the Burji dynasty, whose first
ruler was Barquq. After overthrowing the Ayyubids, their rule lasted
until 1516, when they were conquered by the Turks, although they
continued to hold power in Egypt until 1811, when they were massacred
by Muhammed Ali. FTP, identify this group of slave soldiers, who were
made into an army in the 1170s by Saladin. George Gabriel {Stokes} The
unit named for him is equal to the ratio of viscosity of a fluid in
poises to its density in grams per cubic centimeter. His law predicts
the frictional force on a spherical ball travelling through a visous
medium. FTP, identify this British scientist, whose theorem, which was
first stated as an exam question at Cambridge in 1850, is equivalent
to the divergence theorem for the curl of a vector. James {Jones}
After he died in 1977, his friend Willie Morris assembled the final
chapters of his last novel, Whistle, for publication. His second
novel, Some Came Running, deals with the sexual oddities of a small
town, but he is better known for a trilogy of which Whistle is the
last volume. FTP, identify this novelist, whose experiences in the
Army led to his most famous novel, about four infantrymen who served
in Honolulu just before Pearl Harbor, the National Book Award winning
From Here to Eternity. Constantin {Brancusi} His works in several
versions include The Sea-Lions, Mademoiselle Pogany, and The Prodigal
Son. His first work in his characteristic style is 1910s Sleeping
Muse, done four years after he began his studies under Rodin. FTP,
identify this sculptor, whose most abstract early work was The Kiss,
but who is best known for such highly-polished abstractions as Bird in
Space. Alfred {Marshall} His contributions to monetary theory include
the cash-balance approach to the quantity theory of money, the
purchasing power parity theory of exchange rates, and the analysis of
credit creation. In his main work, he created a theory of partial
equilibrium, distinguishing between time periods required for
different adjustments and introducing the concept of elasticity. FTP,
identify this British economist, whose best known work is 1890s
Principles of Economics. Dubliners The author of this work told his
publisher, Grant Richards, that it was not his fault if the odor of
ashpits and old weeds and offal clung to his effort at writing a
chapter in the moral history of his country. Written in what the
author called a spirit of scrupulous meanness, the stories are grouped
into four types -- representations of childhood, adolescence,
maturity, and public life. FTP, identify this collection of short
stories, which were written between 1904 and 1907, and which include
Two Gallants, Counterparts, and The Dead, a work of James Joyce. Remus
After he was captured by some herdsmen who were tending to their
cattle on the Aventine, he was brought before Amulius. When Numitor
discovered that his grandsons were still alive, he joined with
Faustulus to kill Amulius and take control of the kingdon, and this
man joined with his brother to found a city. FTP, name this man, for
whom the festival of the Lemuria was instituted by his brother, who
leapt over the city walls which were being built by his brother and
who was killed for it, regarded as a co-founder of the city of Rome.
Karl Wilhelm von {Humboldt} He was the first philologist to study the
Basque language scientifically, and he also did work on languages of
the South Sea islands. Born in 1767, he became his countrys minister
to Rome in 1801, but returned seven years later to become minister of
education, and founded the University of Berlin. FTP, identify this
Prussian statesman, whose younger brother was a famous naturalist and
explorer after whom a current is named. Thaddeus {Stevens} After
becoming a partner in an ironworks, he was elected to his states house
of representatives in 1833 as a member of the Anti-Masonic party.
Fifteen years later, he was elected to Congress as a Whig, but he
changed parties again, and in 1858 was elected as a Republican. FTP,
identify this statesman from Pennsylvania, who served as chairman of
the Ways and Means Committee during the Civil War, and who, as the
postwar chairman of the Joint Committee on Reconstruction, put the
South under military reconstruction. Atalanta The daughter of Iasus
and Clymene, she was left to nature because Iasus only wanted boys.
She killed two centaurs, Rhoecus and Hylaeus, who tried to assault
her, and was herself changed into a lion after having sex with her
husband in a temple of Zeus. FTP, identify this mother of
Parthenopaeus, the first to wound the Calydonian Boar and the wife of
Hippomenes after he beat her in a race. the battle of {Buena Vista}
Just after this battle, the commanding general was reprimanded for the
letter he wrote to Edmund Gaines, in which he discussed military
arrangements and defended the eight-weeks armistice. After the
American general withdrew from Victoria, he marched to Agua Nueva, but
was forced to leave that position and went to La Angostura, three
miles north of the hacienda that gives the battle its name. FTP,
identify this battle, which ended the war in northern Mexico after
Santa Anna was defeated by Zachary Taylor. Leviathan Part Four
includes chapters on demonology and other relics of the religion of
the gentiles and the darkness from vain philosophy. Part Three has
chapters on the number, antiquity, scope, authority, and interpreters
of the books of holy scripture, what is necessary for a mans reception
into the kingdom of heaven, and the principles of christian politics.
FTP, identify this philosophical work, whose first two parts are more
frequently read and deal with man and the commonwealth, which was
published in Latin in 1668, seventeen years after being published in
English by Thomas Hobbes. Anders {Angstršm} In 1855, he claimed that a
hot gas emits light at the same wavelengths that it absorbs light when
cool, a theory which was proved four years later by Kirchhoff. He went
on to study the solar spectrum, and determined that the sun must
contain hydrogen. FTP, name this spectroscopist, who mapped many of
the lines which had been observed by Fraunhofer, a longtime professor
at Uppsala who is best known for the unit of length, equal to 10 to
the negative tenth meters, which is named for him. the {carbonari} The
first of their lodges, called Workers of the Globe and Glory, was
founded in a park in Paris. Their secrets included the sign of a
ladder made by raising the hands to the shoulder and then letting them
fall, and good cousins knew each other by the slogan of hope, faith,
love. FTP, identify this order, who merged with the Freemasons in
1766, only to re-emerge in the 1820s under the leadership of Philipe
Buonarroti, who traced their origins to French charcoal burners and
who played a role in the Risorgimento. The {Satyricon} It includes the
episodes of the widow of Ephesus, who falls in love with a soldier
while mourning her dead husband, and the Pergamene boy, who is seduced
by his tutor and ends up demanding more sex than the tutor can take.
It begins with an attack on modern rhetoric and poorly prepared
students, and after hearing Agamemnon blame parents who dont make
their children study, Encolpius gets home to Gito, who complains that
Ascyltus has violently raped him. FTP, identify this work, which
survives as 146 chapters of Books 15 and 16 of what was a sprawling
satire of Neros Rome, a novel by Petronius. {Western Australia}
(accept {Australia} before this state) The westernmost points are Cape
Naturaliste in the south and Dirk Hartog Island, which lies in Shark
Bay, in the middle. In the north, the Durack and King Leopold mountain
ranges abut the Kimberley Plateau, and this state also includes Lakes
Barlee, Carnegie, and Disappointment. FTP, identify this Australian
state, much of which is occupied by the Great Sandy Desert, whose
cities include Wanneroo, Kalgoorlie, and Perth. Abraham {Maslow} In
his doctoral dissertation at the University of Wisconsin, he showed
through experiments on apes that male dominance is established by eye
contact, not fighting. He introduced the phrase peak experience to
describe the best moments in life, and argued that most people had to
satisfy the lower needs -- physical, safety, and belonging -- before
they could get to esteem. FTP, identify this psychologist, who
discussed those needs in 1943s A Theory of Human Motivation, and who
later added self-actualization to that hierarchy. {Leo XIII} He
advocated the renewed study of Aquinas, which led to the doctrine that
true religion did not conflict with true science, and encouraged the
study of church history, believing that it would add to the church's
prestige by showing how it had advanced civilization. His encyclical
Rerum novarum, which applied Christian doctrine to the relation of
capital and labor, earned him the nickname "the workingman's pope."
FTP, identify this man, born Joachim Pecci, who arbitrated a dispute
over the Caroline Islands in 1885, and who came between two popes of
the same name, Pius IX and Pius X. Henry {Miller} Along with William
Saroyan, he wrote Why Abstract?, a study of contemporary painting.
After a trip to Greece in 1939, he wrote his masterpiece, The Colossus
of Maroussi, while a trip across the United States during World War II
yielded The Air-Conditioned Nightmare. FTP, identify this author of
Black Spring, the Rosy Crucifixion trilogy, and the controversial
Tropic of Cancer. Danielle {Steel} She released a collection of love
poems in 1981, and her only non-fiction work, Having a Baby, was
published three years later. Starting in 1989, she began writing
children's books, starting one series with Max and the Babysitter and
writing two others with Martha and Freddie as protagonists, though she
is better known for novels of a more adult nature. FTP, name this
writer, who published Going Home in 1973 and has released a torrent of
trashy novels since, including Thurston House, Mixed Blessings,
Wanderlust, Jewels, and Star. Andreas {Vesalius} Although he became
controversial for his demonstration that men and women have the same
number of ribs, his early thinking was still strongly influenced by
Galen, particularly his views on the circulation of blood. He died in
1564 at Zante, where his ship had been driven by storms as he returned
from a pilgrimage to the Holy Land. FTP, identify this scientist, the
son of the pharmacist to Charles V who was himself court physician to
that king, best known for his On the Structure of the Human Body, the
first accurate presentation of human anatomy. Victor {Hugo} He argued
against the death penalty in his Claude Gueux (guh) and The Last Day
of a Condemned Man. At the age of seventeen he founded a literary
review, the Conserveur LittŽraire, three years before he was awarded a
pension by Louis XVIII for his first book of poems. FTP, identify this
author of Hans of Iceland, Ninety-Three, and Hernani, who is better
known for two epic historical novels, both of which have been made
into movies recently. Fra Filippo and Filippino {Lippi} The sons first
major commission was to finish some frescoes begun by Masaccio in the
Brancacci Chapel, though he is better known for works like The Vision
of Saint Bernard and the 1496 Adoration of the Magi, considered his
masterpiece. His father died in 1469 while doing a series of frescoes
for Spoleto Cathedral, though he is better remembered for the
Tarquinia Madonna and the Barbadori Altarpiece. FTP, identify the
common last name of this father-son pair of artists, the latter of
whom was illegitimate, since his father was a Carmelite monk when an
affair with Lucrezia Buti, a nun, led to his birth. {Marfan} syndrome
The first account of a death from this disease was provided in 1761 by
Giovanni Morgagni, whose case history involved a prostitute who died
while practicing her profession. Death results when the lining of the
aorta ruptures, and it has recently been found to be connected to a
defective gene on chromosome 15 which controls production of
fibrillin. FTP, identify this disease, named for a French scientist
who described it in 1896, which became prominent with the deaths of
Flo Hyman, Chris Patton, and speculation that Abraham Lincoln had it.
Christian {Klein} He worked with Althoff to encourage the postgraduate
training of women in the sciences while serving as chair at Gottingen.
He served as editor of the collected works of Gauss, planned the
Encyclopedia of Mathematical Knowledge which began appearing in 1898,
and, in an inaugural lecture of 1872, proposed the "Erlangen program"
of classifying geometries. FTP, name this German mathematician, best
known for his work in group theory and non-Euclidean geometry, where a
bottle is named for him. {Rembrandt Peale} 10 points: This portraitist
gained fame for his The Court of Death, an enormous painting which he
termed a moral allegory and which toured the United States for over 50
years.  5 points: He may be best known as one of the seventeen
children of one of the most prolific artists of the eighteenth
century, in more ways than one, and was named for a Dutch master.
Benjamin {West} 10 points: His early works, such as Agrippina Landing
at Brundisium with the Ashes of Germanicus, were in the Neoclassical
style, but he later turned to Romanticism in such paintings as Saul
and the Witch of Endor.  5 points: This successor to Reynolds as
President of the Royal Academy may be best known for his Death of
Wolfe. Jonathan 10 points: After he defeated the Philistines at Geba,
he and his armor- bearer took another garrison by themselves. He was
buried at Jabesh, but his body was later moved to the land of
Benjamin.  5 points: This son of Saul supported David for the throne
despite the fact that he was the legitimate heir to it. {Arms and the
Man} A man who turns out to be Captain Bluntschi climbs into Rainas
room. He is a Swiss mercenary fighting with the Serbian army, but he
never carries ammunition into battle, prefering chocolate instead.
Later, he returns to Major Petkoffs house, and proposes to Raina after
her former fiancŽ, Sergius, becomes engaged to her maid. FTP, identify
this play, which became the first of its authors works to be performed
in public when it premiered in 1894, whose title comes from the first
line of the Aeneid and which was written by George Bernard Shaw.
William {Baffin} He was killed in 1622 at the siege of Ormuz, after
carrying out surveys of the Red Sea. While under the command of Robert
Bylot in the Discovery, he sailed as far north as 77 degrees latitude,
and possibly became the first person to determine a degree of latitude
from sea by lunar calculations. FTP, identify this English navigator,
who took part in expeditions to discover the Northwest Passage between
1612 and 1616, discovering Lancaster, Smith, and Jones sounds, as well
as the large bay which is named for him. {Pictures at an Exhibition}
The seventh section depicts a dialogue between Samuel Goldenberg and
Schmuyle. The fourth is set at the Tuileries, the eighth at the Market
Place at Limoges, and the ninth alternates heavy and light chords in
its depiction of the Paris catacombs. FTP, identify this musical work,
whose other sections include The Gnome, Promenade, and The Great Gate
of Kiev, written to honor the memory of Victor Hartmann by his friend
Modest Mussorgky. Henri {Le Ch‰telier} Toward the end of his career,
he invented the inverted stage metallurgical microscope, introduced
the platinum-platinum rhodium thermocouple, and developed new methods
of measuring high temperatures. After studying at the School of Mines
in Paris, he returned to teach there in 1877, and did important work
on the chemistry of cement. FTP, identify this French scientist, best
known for the principle he formulated in 1884, that if a system in
chemical equilibrium experiences a change in conditions, the position
of equilibrium will change so as to cancel out that change. A
{Farewell to Arms} Book One begins: In the late summer of that year we
lived in a house in a village that looked across the river and the
plain to the mountains. Book Two begins with the arrival in Milan,
where the protagonist has been sent for surgery after having been
wounded in a mortar attack. FTP, identify this novel, published in
1929, whose main characters end up in Montreux in 1918, where
Catherine dies after giving birth to the stillborn child of Frederic
Henry, written by Ernest Hemingway. Sir Isaiah {Berlin} His collected
writings include Against the Current, Concepts and Categories, and
Russian Thinkers. His Historical Inevitability examines the debate
between determinism and free will, while his Four Essays on Liberty
argues that man is morally free. FTP, identify this Latvian-born
philosopher, who took a phrase from Archilochus for the title of his
essay on Tolstoys theory of history, The Hedgehog and the Fox. vitamin
{D} It comes in the form of two steroid derivatives. Ergocalciferol is
found in yeast and formed by ultraviolet light, while cholecalciferol
is produced by the interaction of sunlight and cholesterol. FTP,
identify this fat-soluble vitamin, the active form of which is made in
response to secretions of parathyroid hormone, deficiency of which can
cause osteomalacia and rickets. Ludovico {Ariosto} In 1502, he became
governor of Canossa, and a year later he entered the service of
Cardinal Ippolito. After returning to Ferrara from a stint as governor
of the Garfagnana in 1525, he wrote five comedies, including La Lena
and Il Negromante, but he is better known as a poet. FTP, identify
this Italian author, whose masterwork, which took him twenty-seven
years to write, was a continuation of Boiardos Orlando Innamorato.
{Namibia} In the northeast, this country includes a narrow stretch of
land called the Caprivi Strip. In the north, the cities of Rehoboth
and Ondangua are in Ovamboland, while the Kaokoveld and the Kaukaveld
lie to the west and east, respectively. FTP, identify this African
nation on the Tropic of Capricorn, bordered by Zambia, Botswana,
Angola, and South Africa, whose capital is at Windhoek. Morrison R.
{Waite} After serving as a state legislator in Ohio, he served with
William Evarts and Caleb Cushing as American counsel at the Alabama
tribunal. In such cases as Stone vs. Farmers Loan, he argued for
reasonable regulation of state power, although he declared that state
regulation of railroads was vaild even though it may indirectly affect
those without in his opinion in the Granger Cases. FTP, identify this
sixth Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, who was appointed to the
court in 1874 and served between Salmon Chase and Melville Fuller. the
{Peoples} Party of the U.S.A. or the {Populist} Party In 1890, the
Colored Farmers Alliance, the Southern Alliance, and the Farmers
Mutual Benefit Association met in Ocala, Florida, and came up with a
list of grievances similar to those which had been made the year
before in St. Louis. The platform which would be put together after
the first national convention in Omaha called for unlimited coinage of
silver, direct election of senators, and a graduated income tax,
though the party was weakened by Southerners who were afraid of
bringing blacks to power. FTP, identify this political party, which in
1892 nominated James Weaver for President. Andrea {Mantegna} After
serving as an apprentice to a tailor named Francesco Squarcione, who
seems to have adopted him, he entered the service of Ludovico Gonzaga,
the Duke of Mantua. He served the Gonzagas for all but two years of
his career, the exception being a stint in Rome beginning in 1488 when
he did a cycle of frescoes for Pope Innocent VIII. FTP, identify this
painter, who was born in Vicenza, whose works include the Saint Zeno
altarpiece, The Triumph of Caesar, Saint Sebastian, and a Dead Christ
notable for its foreshortening. Karl {Barth} In 1911, he became the
pastor of the village of Safenwil, and while serving in that office he
gained attention for a commentary on Pauls Epistle to the Romans in
which he attacked the Protestant belief that man could gain
understanding through his own reason. He entered academia in the 20s,
praising Christ as the risen Lord and the only savior, and arguing
that God had predestined that everyone would enter Heaven. FTP,
identify this Swiss theologian, a Calvinist whose magnum opus was a
work of over 9,000 pages, left unfinished at his death, Church
Dogmatics. {Neptune} Scientists do not know why it radiates almost
three times as much heat as it receives from the Sun. Another unusual
feature of this planet is that its largest moon travels in the
opposite direction of its rotation. It has a ring system with only
three rings, and only had two known moons until Voyager 2 discovered
six more. FTP, identify this gas giant, which was discovered from
mathematical calculations in 1846, whose moons include Nereid and
Triton. The {Life of} Samuel {Johnson} On the last page of the book,
the author proclaims that its subject was a man whose talents,
acquirements, and virtues were so extraordinary that the more his
character is considered the more he will be regarded by the present
age, and by posterity, with admiration and reverence. Dedicated to
Joshua Reynolds, the book was completed with the assistance of Edmond
Malone, and was published in 1791, seven years after the death of its
subject. FTP, identify this massive biography, which focuses on the
last twenty years of its subjects life, following his meeting in 1763
with its author, James Boswell. Hecate The daughter of a Titan named
Perses and Asteria, she came to Greece from Caria. Also known as
Enodia, Kourotrophos, and Trioditis, she was worshiped at any
crossroads where three ways met. FTP, identify this mythological
figure, who taught magic to Medea, a three-formed goddess of the
Underworld. Jean-Baptiste {Lully} He took his rival Henri Guichard to
court, claiming that the latter had tried to kill him by putting
arsenic in his snuff, but his victory was reversed on appeal. The king
supported him in spite of his homosexuality, which became a public
scandal, even after his collaborator, Phillipe Quinault, was accused
of slandering the kings mistress in his Isis. FTP, identify this
French composer, who wrote music for a number of Molieres comedies
before turning to sacred music, who was conducting his Te Deum in 1687
when his practice of striking his foot with a pointed cane to mark the
beat led to him getting gangrene and dying of blood poisoning. The
{Cherry Orchard} Because of the main event of the play, Dunyashas
hopes of marrying Yasha are crushed, and she is forced to marry the
poor clerk Yephodov; Varya has to become a housekeeper; but Fiers is
unaffected, and ends the play worrying that his master did not wear a
fur coat to the station. After Madame Ranevskayas son Grischa drowned,
she had to go to Paris to forget about it, and she returns home five
years later to discover that her whole estate would have to be sold at
auction to repay her debts. FTP, identify this drama, which premiered
in 1904, in which Lopahkin decides to buy the estate and destroy the
titular object, written by Anton Chekhov. Herbert Marshall {McLuhan}
After he converted to Roman Catholicism in 1937, he would only teach
at Catholic schools, and for 31 years was a member of the English
department at St. Michaels College of the University of Toronto. He
cofounded the journal Explorations in 1953, and his lesser known books
include Understanding Media, The Mechanical Bride, and War and Peace
in the Global Village. FTP, identify this author of The Gutenberg
Galaxy, a commentator on communcations technology who may be best
remembered for his pronouncement that the medium is the message.
Walther {Nernst} After World War I, in which both of his sons were
killed, he refused an offer to become ambassador to the United States.
He worked on the theory of indicators, proposed the "fast path"
reaction between hydrogen and chlorine, and formulated the concept of
solution pressure, but is best known for his work in thermodynamics.
FTP, identify this German chemist, whose heat theorem, which states
that perfect crystals have the same entropy at absolute zero, is the
third law of thermodynamics. Ludwig {Mies} van der Rohe His
residential constructions include the Tugendhat House of Brno, the
Farnsworth House in Plano, Illinois, and the Promontory Apartments. He
became Professor of Architecture at the Armour Institute of Technology
in 1938, five years after he finished serving in Dessau and Berlin as
director of the Bauhaus. FTP, identify this architect, who made his
name with the German Pavilion at the Barcelona Exposition, better
known for Berlins National Gallery and New Yorks Seagram Building.
{Dred Scott} v. Sanford In this case, Justices Robert Grier and John
Catron violated judicial ethics by telling the President what the
Court intended to do, though there is no evidence of a conspiracy to
determine the outcome. The dissents of John McLean and Benjamin Curtis
referred to the Congressional powers outlined in article four, section
three of the Constitution. FTP, identify this decision, in which every
justice issued a seperate opinion, the first case in 54 years in which
the Court found an act of Congress unconstitutional, when it was ruled
that the Missouri Compromise violated fifth amendment property rights.
Barnabas The epistle of this name, which is included with the
Apostolic Fathers, claims that most of the commandments of the Old
Testament were only intended allegorically and states that an evil
angel told the Jews to take circumcision literally. Tertullian thought
that he wrote the Letter to the Hebrews, and he was allegedly martyred
in Cyprus, where he went after the Council of Jerusalem. FTP, identify
this Levite, who is also known as Joseph and whose better known name
means son of encouragement, a cousin of John Mark who was a friend of
Paul until they split over the scope of the churchs mission. Debra
{Winger} At the age of 18, she suffered a coma after an accident at
the amusement park at which she was working as a troll. She spent
three months in the Israeli army in 1972, and got her entertainment
break when she played Drusilla the Wonder Girl, Wonder Woman's younger
sister, in the 70's TV show. FTP, name this actress, who provided part
of the voice for E.T., the former wife of Timothy Hutton whose best
known film was An Officer and a Gentleman. {holography} or
{holograph}s(accept alternatives) The first ones were not created
until eighteen years after the idea was conceived, when two scientists
at the University of Michigan, Emmet Leith and Juris Upatnieks, made
them. The scientist who thought of them was trying to improve electron
microscopes, but was unable to produce them in 1947 because of
interference effects. FTP, identify this concept introduced by Dennis
Gabor, which required laser light to create three-dimensional images.
{El Salvador} Lakes in this country include Ilopango, Olomega, and
Coatepeque. The Bay of Jiquilisco lies in the south, to the west of
the Gulf of Fonseca, which is shared by two other nations. FTP,
identify this Central American country, which is bisected by the Lempa
river, whose cities include San Miguel and Santa Ana, and which is
bordered by Honduras and Guatemala. Paracelsus He recognized the
connection between cretinism and goiter, showed that silicosis was a
danger for miners, and was a pioneer in the use of mercury to treat
syphilis. Although he argued that madness was a disease and not caused
by demons, he is better known for more outlandish views, and attempted
to show how human life could be artificially created through the
fermentation of semen. FTP, identify this city physician of Basel,
whose real name was Theophrastus Bombastus von Hohenheim, who tried to
use alchemy to solve medical problems. Oda {Nobunaga} In 1576, he
began work on the Azuchi castle on the shore of Lake Biwa, but it was
demolished after his death. After he destroyed the Enryakuji, the most
well-armed of the monasteries, he fought other Buddhist groups, and
spent ten years laying siege to the Ishiyama-honganji monastery of the
Pure Land sect. FTP, identify this man, who was killed by Akechi
Mitsuhide in 1582, a provincial lord who seized Koto in 1568 and set
up Yoshiaki as a puppet shogun, making himself a virtual dictator of
Japan. Shiva When hes not sitting alone atop Mount Kailasa, he may be
seen riding his white bull Nandi. The love god Kama was reborn as
Rukmini by permission of this god after he had burnt him to cinders,
in retaliation for having been hit by an arrow of love and roused from
his meditation. FTP, identify this Hindu god, who wears a tiger skin
and has a snake around his neck, who has four arms, four faces, and
three eyes, whose consort is Parvati, and who is known as the
destroyer. The {Plague} or La {Peste} After the son of Monsieur Othon
dies, Father Paneloux (pan-uh-loo) becomes confused as to Gods wishes.
Grand, a minor clerk, prevents Cottard from hanging himself, and later
recovers to work on his manuscript, although Tarrou, a political
agitator, dies in the protagonists house. FTP, identify this novel,
the story of the doctor Bernard Rieux (ree-uh), which is set in Oran
and considered the best work of Albert Camus. Hymenoptera The two
suborders of this classification are Chalastogastra, whose larvae are
caterpillars which feed on leaves, and Clistogastra, whose larvae are
either embryonic or legless vermiforms. They possess ovipositors,
their mouths have biting jaws, with a tongue for lapping or sucking,
and they have two pairs of stiff membranous wings. FTP, identify this
order of insects, which include ichneumon flies, ants, bees and wasps.
John Peter {Altgeld} He argued that the poor were denied fair legal
representation in Our Penal Machinery and Its Victims. He served as
chief justice of the Superior Court of Cook County until 1891, and his
career in public office ended five years later when John Tanners
election prevented him from winning a second term. FTP, identify this
first Democratic governor of his state, who was vilified for opposing
Clevelands use of troops in the Pullman strike, and for his pardoning
of three anarchists convicted in the Haymarket Square incident. The
{Mysteries of Udolpho} It is set in Gascony and the Apennines near the
end of the sixteenth century. After Madame Cheron marries Montoni, she
decides that the Chevalier de Valancourt is not good enough for her
ward, Emily de St. Aubert. FTP, identify this 1794 work, in which
Emily is taken away to the title castle, but escapes Montoni's
clutches after her aunt's death, a Gothic novel by Ann Radcliffe. the
{Bricker} Amendment 15 points: It was proposed in 1953 by its namesake
Senator from Ohio, but was strongly opposed by John Foster Dulles, and
the Amendment eventually fell one vote short of a two-thirds majority.
It would have changed the Constitution by limiting the range of
international treaties to which the U.S. could be a signatory. Peter
{Abelard} He was forced to leave the monastery of Saint-Denis after he
argued that it would have been impossible for Dionysius the Areopagite
to have founded it. Considered the founder of the University of Paris,
his Sic et Non showed that authorities could be cited in support of
either of contradictory positions. the {Essays} of {Elia} Recent
critics have emphasized the pieces which recall the authors childhood,
such as Christs Hospital Five and Thirty Years Ago. The first of them,
Recollections of the South-Sea House, appeared in August of 1820 in
the London Magazine. FTP, identify this collection of writings, which
includes Dream Children, A Chapter on Ears, and A Dissertation upon
Roast Pig, which were really written by Charles Lamb. Joseph John
{Thomson} After his fathers death in 1872, he couldnt afford to become
an apprentice engineer, and so he turned to science. His mathematical
analysis of vortex rings led him to investigate cathode rays, and he
repeated Hertzs experiments to show that electric fields would deflect
cathode rays. FTP, identify this English physicist, whose son won the
Nobel Prize for showing that the electron acted like a particle and a
wave, and who himself won the Nobel Prize in 1906 for his work on
conduction through gases, though he is better known as the discoverer
of the electron. the {belt} of {Hippolyta} (accept alternatives like
the {girdle} of {Hippolyta}) It's not the Golden Fleece, but in order
to get it, the hero put together a team of volunteers and set sail,
stopping in Mysia on the way to help king Lycus defeat the Bebryces.
On the return trip, the hero stopped in Troy and rescued Hesione >from
a sea monster, although her father Laomedon refused to give him the
horses he had promised as a reward. FTP, identify this item, which was
desired by Admete, the daughter of King Eurystheus, an article of
clothing which Hercules fetched from its Amazon owner as his ninth
labor. {North} Island On the southeast coast, Cape Kidnappers and the
Mahia Peninsula lie on either side of Hawke Bay, while Cape Runaway
sits on one side of the Bay of Plenty in the northeast. Lake Taupo
lies at the center of the island, whose mountain ranges include the
Kaimanawa and the Huiarau and whose cities include Takapuna, Napier,
and Wangarei. FTP, identify this island, surrounded by the Pacific
Ocean, the Tasman Sea, and the Cook Strait, whose major cities include
Hastings, Wellington, and Auckland. Learned {Hand} In an antitrust
suit against the Aluminum Corporation of America, he wrote that
Congress did not condone good trusts and condemn bad ones: it forbade
all. In 1950, he used an interpretation of the clear and present
danger test to uphold the conviction of 11 Communists under the Smith
Act, a year before he retired from his position as judge of the second
circuit of the U.S. Circuit Court. FTP, identify this jurist from New
York, who may be best remembered for an accomplishment he never
attained: he never served on the Supreme Court. {Juno and the Paycock}
Mary rejects Jerry Devine in favor of Charles Bentham, who gets her
pregnant but abandons her when he discovers that she wont inherit
anything. Johnny is taken off to be executed after it is revealed that
he was the informer who caused the death of Robbie Tancred. In the
end, the Captain is deserted by his family, and left drinking with
Joxer Daly. FTP, identify this play, which premiered in 1924 at the
Abbey Theatre, the story of the Boyle family which was written by Sean
OCasey. {macrophage}s Reticuloendothelial cells are similar to these,
but they are only found in blood vessels and not throughout the body.
These cells develop from monocytes and characteristically contain
nongranular cytoplasm and a horseshoe-shaped nucleus. FTP, identify
these cells found in the liver, spleen, lymph nodes, and other
tissues, a large type of phagocyte which ingests bacteria and cell
debris. Saint {Cecilia} The prefect Almachius ordered her to be
suffocated in her bathroom, but she emerged unharmed, and he sent a
soldier to behead her. Unfortunately, the executioner was incompetent,
failing to kill her despite giving her neck three blows, and she
lingered for three days before dying. FTP, name this saint, who was
betrothed against her will to Valerian, but converted him and his
brother Tiburtius to Christianity, whose legend is told by the Second
Nun in the Canterbury Tales, best known as the patron saint of music.
Nikolay {Gogol} He was working as a lecturer in history at the
University of Saint Petersburg when the success of his poem Italia
prompted him to write a lengthy narrative poem, Hanz Keuchelgarten. It
was a complete failure, and he turned to prose, publishing in 1835 a
collection of essays and three stories entitled Arabesques. FTP, name
this Russian author of Taras Bulba, Nevsky Prospect, and The Overcoat,
who is best known for works like The Inspector General and Dead Souls.
Thomas {Eakins} He dabbled in sculpture, producing two reliefs for the
battle monument in Trenton, but is better known as a painter. A
student of Bonnat and Gerome (jey-rohm) at the Ecole des Beaux Arts
(ay-coal day boze-ar) in the 1860s, his works include Whistling for
Plover, The Swimming Hole, and The Chess Players. FTP, identify this
American artist, who studied at the Jefferson Medical College in his
hometown of Philadelphia, best known for Max Schmitt in a Single
Scull, The Agnew Clinic, and The Gross Clinic. Buddy {Holly} He
pioneered the use of double-tracking and over-dubbing on his
recordings, and he was the first major singer to add drums and rhythm-
and- blues style to country music. His band introduced the standard
rock-and-roll format of two guitars, bass and drums, but he left it in
1958 to pursue a solo career. FTP, identify this native of Lubbock,
Texas, whose hits include Oh Boy, Not Fade Away, Thatll Be the Day,
and Peggy Sue, and who died a year after leaving the Crickets.
{Zarathustra} (accept {Thus Spoke (or Spake) Zarathustra} or {Also
Sprach Zarathustra}) After meeting a saint in the forest, he comes to
a town where he sees a tightrope walker fall to his death. He then
returns to the mountains, and speaks about priests, the virtuous, the
rabble, tarantulas, and the famous wise men before singing the Night
Song. FTP, identify this title character of a work published between
1883 and 1885, which was adapted into a tone poem by Richard Strauss
and which was written by Friedrich Nietzsche. Robert Stewart
{Castlereagh} (castle-ray) He entered parliament as a Whig from County
Down in 1790, but turned Tory five years later and was made a
Viscount. After serving as Irish Secretary, he twice served as
Minister of War before gaining the post of Foreign Secretary in Lord
Liverpools government. FTP, identify this British politician, who
thought he was being blackmailed for homosexuality and committed
suicide in 1822, seven years after he represented England at the
Congress of Vienna. The {Grand Canyon Suite} In the first movement, a
muted trumpet suggests the sunrise, while the fifth movement is a
depiction of the onset and dissipation of a cloudburst. In the third
movement, On the Trail, a theme describing a donkey is juxtaposed
against a cowboy melody. FTP, identify this work whose other movements
include Sunset and The Painted Desert, which was introduced by Paul
Whiteman in 1931, the best known work of Ferde Grofe (grow-FEY). Henry
{George} After publishing The Irish Land Question in 1881, he became a
correspondent in England for the Irish World. Upon returning to the
United States, he was defeated in a race with Abram Hewitt and
Theodore Roosevelt as a liberal candidate for mayor of New York in
1886, and would die in 1897 while campaigning as an independent
candidate for mayor. FTP, name this reformer, whose 1871 pamphlet on
Our Land and Land Policy set forth the single tax theory which he
expounded in Progress and Poverty. O. {Henry} (accept William Sydney
{Porter}) His posthumously published volumes include Sixes and Sevens,
Rolling Stones, and Waifs and Strays. He founded The Rolling Stone, a
comic magazine, in 1894, but it was not until he found himself in a
Columbus prison for embezzlement five years later that he began to
write stories of his own. FTP, identify this author of The Trimmed
Lamp, The Four Million, and Cabbages and Kings, best known for stories
with trick endings like The Luck of Roaring Camp and The Gift of the
Magi. {Porifera} (prompt on early {sponge} buzz) Flagellated cells
known as choanocytes filter particles of food from the water which
they bring in through openings in the body wall. The hollow body,
which is little more than an aggregation of cells, is supported by a
skeleton of spicules of chalk, silica, or fibrous protein. FTP,
identify this phylum of invertebrates which live attached to rocks and
other surfaces, commonly known as sponges. Sergei {Prokofiev} His
death went unnoticed, since he died on the same day as Stalin. His
first symphony is classical in manner, but under the training of
Stravinsky in Paris, he developed a more modern style, seen in such
ballets as Cinderella and Romeo and Juliet. FTP, name this composer of
the Scythian Suite, whose operatic works include War and Peace and the
Love for Three Oranges. the {gag} rule or {gag} resolution It was
proposed by a special committee led by Henry Pinckney of South
Carolina. When it was not renewed at the opening of the second session
of Congress in December, William Slade took advantage of the
opportunity to present new petitions, resulting in the decision by a
combined front of Democrats to adopt an even stricter version. FTP,
identify this regulation, which was rescinded in 1844, and which was
originally put in place in response to Thomas Morris, James Buchanan,
and John Quincy Adams, whose presentations of petitions for abolition
to Congress annoyed pro-slavery Southerners. Eratosthenes He wrote a
book on Greek comedy, developed a chronology based on the Trojan War,
and suggested that a day be added to the Egyptian calendar every four
years. His scientific achievements include a map of 675 stars and a
measurement of the obliquity of the ecliptic, but he is best known for
an experiment he made around 240 B.C. FTP, name this Greek polymath,
who used his knowledge of the distance between Syene and Alexandria
and the position of the sun on the summer solstice to determine the
circumference of the earth. Oliver {Goldsmith} After returning from
medical studies at Leyden, he was employed by Samuel Richardson, and
his first literary success came in 1764 with The Traveller. Author of
An Enquiry into the Present State of Polite Learning in Europe,
stories like "Asem, an Eastern Tale" were published in The Bee. FTP,
identify this Irish born writer, whose works include The Good Natured
Man, The Deserted Village, The Vicar of Wakefield, and She Stoops to
Conquer. Herbert {Spencer} After leaving school at the age of 16, he
went to work as a railroad engineer, but quit that job in 1848 to
become a sub-editor of The Economist. The probable model for Austin
Feverel in Meredith's The Ordeal of Richard Feverel and for Mr.
Casaubon in Middlemarch, his 1852 essay on the "Development
Hypothesis" preceded Darwin in proposing a general theory of
evolution, though it lacked a concept of natural selection. FTP, name
this English thinker, the author of First Principles, Social Statics,
and The Principles of Psychology whose "synthetic philosophy" included
social Darwinism. Arnold {Schoenberg} He took counterpoint lessons
from Alexander Zemlinsky, married Zemlinskys sister, and played cello
in Zemlinskys group Polyhymnia. A triskadecaphobic, he crossed out the
second a in the title of his unfinished opera so that there would only
be twelve letters in it. FTP, name this composer of choral works like
Kol Nidre, A Survivor from Warsaw, and Pierrot Lunaire, better known
for Moses and Aron, Transfigured Night, and as the inventor of the
twelve-tone system. the {Leyden jar} It was first invented in 1745 by
Ewald von Kleist, but it was independently developed a few months
later by Peter van Musschenbrock, and its current name comes from
association with the latter. It contains a brass chain connected to a
stopper, which is inside a glass container coated with tinfoil. FTP,
identify this kind of capacitor, whose name derives from the fact that
it was originally used at a university in Holland. Kazuo {Ishiguro}
His first novel tells the story of Etsuko, who is attempting to cope
with the suicide of her daughter Keiko. His second novel, set just
after World War II, describes the life of Masuji Ono, a former
propagandist. FTP, identify this author of The Unconsoled, A Pale View
of Hills, and An Artist of the Floating World, best known for a Booker
Prize winning novel about an English butler, The Remains of the Day.
Harlan Fiske {Stone} He served as dean of Columbias law school from
1910 to 1923, but left the position to become attorney general. He
argued that the government must be allowed to govern in his dissent in
U.S. vs. Butler, and he claimed that states should not be allowed to
legislate religious belief in his lone dissent in 1940s Jehovahs
Witnesses Case. FTP, identify this jurist from New Hampshire, a
supporter of the New Deal who joined the Court in 1925 and who, in
1941, became the 11th Chief Justice. the {1932} Winter Olympics or the
{Lake Placid} Winter Olympics When Karl Schafer won the men's figure
skating title, he denied Gillis Grafstrom the chance to win four in a
row. Billy Fiske led the victorious four-man bobsled team, which
included Eddie Eagen on its crew, the only man to win gold medals in
both the Winter and Summer Games. FTP, identify this Winter Olympics,
in which the U. S. swept all four speed skating events, although
Canada won its fourth consecutive gold in hockey, the third winter
games and the first held in the United States. Emanuel {Swedenborg}
After meeting John Flamsteed and Edmund Halley on a trip to England,
he returned home and began publishing a scientific magazine, Daedelus
hyperboreus. In his Economia regni animalis, he showed that the brain
does not move in rhythm with the heart and explained the purpose of
cerebrospinal fluid, but he is better known for more abstruse
speculations, such as his claims that the Trinity was unified in one
divine human and that material reality corresponds to spiritual truth.
FTP, identify this man, cited as the type of the mystic by Emerson in
Representative Men, whose body was moved to Uppsala Cathedral in 1908
by the Swedish government. Nostromo The title character falls in love
with Giselle, the sister of his fiancŽe Linda, and is shot when her
father Giorgio Viola mistakes him for an intruder. After his partner,
Martin Decoud, drowns himself, the protagonist acts to save Doctor
Monygham, who is in love with Emilia Gould. FTP, identify this novel
set in Costaguanas province of Sulaco, in which Charles Gould gives
his silver to the title character, a work of Joseph Conrad. Friedrich
von {Hayek} His early work, such as The Pure Theory of Capital, dealt
with the problems caused by industrial fluctuations. His later work
addresses the role of prices in controlling the economy, a question
considered in his Law, Legislation and Liberty. FTP, identify this
man, who was a professor at London University, the University of
Chicago, and the universities of Freiburg and Salzburg, who argued for
free markets and individual liberty in The Road to Serfdom, and who
shared the Nobel Prize in 1974 with Gunnar Myrdal. Epirus It was
divided into two regions with capitals at Dyrrachium and Acarnania
under the Byzantine Empire, and after 1204 went from being an
independent despotate, to a return to Byzantine rule, to becoming a
part of Serbia, to absorption by the Ottoman Empire. In antiquity, it
was a kingdom ruled by the Molossian tribe, whose first king was
Alexander, the brother of Olympias and the uncle of Alexander the
Great. FTP, identify this region, which lies between the Pindos
Mountains and the Ionian Sea, today a part of Albania, whose most
famous king, who won some victories that really werent worth the
trouble, was named Pyrrhus. Ernst {Mach} While working at Graz, he
discovered a set of bands, which are named for him, that result when a
distribution of light leads to a change of illumination at a point.
According to his "criterion," a theory should only use propositions
which can lead to statements about observable phenomena, a position
which led him to be grouped with the positivists. FTP, name this
scientist, who is best known for a paper published with Salcher in
1887, in which he showed that the ratio of projectile velocity and
sound velocity is related to the angle made by a shock wave, a
supersonic discovery which led to a famous number being named for him.
Henry John Temple, Viscount {Palmerston} He opposed the cautious
foreign policy of Lord Aberdeen, favoring the Italian liberals,
opposing Louis Philippe, and gaining Hong Kong by the treaty of
Nanking. He sent a squadron to Greece to ensure that debts owed to Don
Pacifico, a citizen from Gibraltar, would be repaid, but was dismissed
by Russell a year later for not consulting the cabinet before
welcoming Louis Napoleons seizure of power. FTP, identify this British
statesman, who returned as prime minister in 1855 and successfully
closed the Black Sea at the treaty of Paris, who died in 1865 and who
was memorably preferred to Pitt the Elder in a barroom brawl. the
{Kalamazoo} river Its name means boiling pot, and was given to the
river because of its gas bubbles. It starts in Hillsdale County and
curves south before reaching the city of the same name, after which it
flows northwest into Lake Michigan. FTP, identify this river, which
passes Albion, Marshall, and Battle Creek, as well as the city of the
same name, which is the home of Nazareth College and Western Michigan
University. Ptah He eventually was combined with Sokar, a god of the
dead. He was the father of Nefertem by his wife, the lion goddess
Sakhmet, and according to some myths, he created the world out of mud
in his aspect of water god, Nun. FTP, identify this Egyptian deity,
who was always pictured as a person holding an ankh, and who was the
chief god of Memphis. cholesterol To discover how it was synthesized,
Rudolf Schoenheimer gave rats heavy water to drink. After Schoenheimer
committed suicide, his associate David Rittenberg teamed up with
Konrad Bloch to feed rats acetate ions, and again the deuterium tag
showed up in this kind of molecule. Bloch later discovered that
acetate formed squalene, a compound which leads to the formation of
this molecule found in the adrenal glands, myelin sheaths, and along
with certain proteins. FTP, identify this substance, too much of which
can cause gallstones and atherosclerosis, which is the foundation of
steroids. Dorothy {Parker} She collaborated with Arnand d'Usseau on
Ladies of the Corridor and with Elmer Rice on Close Harmony. Her
poetry first appeared in Vogue in 1916, and would be collected in
volumes such as Sunset Gun, Death and Taxes, and Not so Deep as a
Well. FTP, identify this writer of Laments for the Living, After such
Pleasures, and Enough Rope, a drama critic best remembered as the most
savage wit of the Algonquin Circle. Janissaries They were formed on
the advice of Chendereli Kara Khalil, and were blessed by Haji
Bektash, the founder of a sect of dervishes who became their patron
saint. Until 1574, there were no more than 20,000 of them, but their
number fluctuated wildly after the accession of Murad III. FTP,
identify this group, who revolted in Constantinople in 1826 and were
massacred by Mahmud II, Christians who served as the standing army of
the Ottoman Empire. Jean {Toomer} He wrote two plays, Natalie Mann and
The Sacred Factory, and his unpublished works were collected in The
Wayward and the Seeking. A student at the Universty of Wisconsin, his
experiences as superintendent of a black school in Sparta, Georgia,
provided the groundwork for his most famous work. FTP, name this
author, a student of the mystic Georges Gurdijieff who is best known
for his 1923 collection of stories and poems, Cane. {Fear and
Trembling} It begins with an epigraph from Hamann stating that what
Tarquinius Superbus said in the garden by means of the poppies, the
son understood but the messenger did not. Subtitled a dialectical
lyric, it includes an exordium, a eulogy, and three prolemata: Is
there a teleological suspension of the ethical? Is there an absolute
duty to God? Was it ethically defensible for Abraham to conceal his
undertaking? FTP, identify this work, ostensibly written by Johannes
de Silentio, but actually authored by Soren Kierkegaard. Jean Le Rond
{d'Alembert} Just before he died, J. H. Lambert offered to name the
newly discovered moon of Venus after him, but he refused the offer
because he didn't believe the satellite actually existed. Probably the
illegitimate son of the chevalier Destouches, his first name comes
from the church on whose steps he was left as an infant. FTP, name
this Frenchman, whose Treatise on Dynamics introduces a principle
which states that Newton's third law of motion holds for moving
particles, best known for the scientific articles he contributed to
the encyclopedia of Diderot. Micah In Jeremiah 26:18, he is mentioned
as a prophet of Hezekiahs time, and his book is quoted. Chapters 1-3
of his book, which condemn Samaria and Judah for violating tradition,
are almost certainly by him, while the subsequent four chapters, which
promise a restored Zion and condemn social injustice in Jerusalem, are
doubtful. FTP, identify this prophet from Moresheth, whose name is
short for who is like Yahweh, a contemporary of Isaiah whose book is
the sixth of the Minor Prophets. {Ludwig II} While out walking near
Starnberg Lake, he overpowered the psychiatrist who was walking with
him, and dragged him to his death in the water in the course of
drowning himself. The son of Maximilian II, he supported Prussia in
the Franco-Prussian War, and offered the imperial crown to William I.
FTP, identify this man, who became king of Bavaria at the age of 19,
and proceeded to devote himself to being Wagners patron, making a
shrine to Wagners operas at his castle, Neuschwanstein. {Lope} Felix
de Vega He wrote a sequel to Orlando Furioso, a burlesque epic about
the romantic lives of three cats, and historical epics on Mary Stuart,
Sir Francis Drake, and the Third Crusade. He appears as Belardo in his
La Arcadia, and his other prose works include The Pilgrim in his
Country and La Dorotea. FTP, identify this writer of the Spanish
Golden Age, who also wrote some plays and was known as the prodigy of
nature for his vast output. Sucre Founded by Pedro de Anzurez on the
site of a Charcas Indian village, it is known as the city of four
names, having been called Charcas, Chuquisaca, La Plata and its
present name at various points. Lying in a valley which is crossed by
the Cachimayo river, its University of Saint Francis Xavier was
founded in 1624, making it one of the oldest in South America. FTP,
identify this city, which was renamed in 1840, a year after it became
a national capital, for the first President of the country whose
supreme court it is now home to, Bolivia. {Totem and Taboo} It ends
with the assertion that In the beginning was the deed, although the
author admits that we must not let our judgment be influenced too much
by the analogy with neurotics. In the first chapter, The Savages Dread
of Incest, the author presents ethnographic data meant to support his
speculation about the primal scene of humanity. FTP, identify this
book, which claims that a band of brothers attacked their father
because he had all the women, an event which explains why certain
symbolic animals are both worshipped and eaten, according to Sigmund
Freud. {chloroplast}s They are difficult to isolate, and it was not
until 1954 that Daniel Arnon obtained them intact from spinach. In
1865, Julius Sachs discovered the importance of these subcellular
bodies, which consist of lamellae, clusters of which are known as
grana. FTP, identify these lens-shaped organelles, stacks of
thylakoids surrounded by stroma in which photosynthesis takes place.
The {Hay Wain} It is the most famous of a series of six large
paintings which depicted life on the Stour River, the first of which
was The White Horse. It was originally exhibited under the title
Landscape: Noon in 1821, but it became more famous under another name
three years later, when it won a Gold Medal at the Salon of Paris.
FTP, identify this serene oil painting, considered the masterpiece of
John Constable. Roger {Williams} He was befriended by Sir Edward Coke,
who arranged for his education at Cambridge, and after taking holy
orders in the Anglican Church became chaplain to Sir William Masham.
His written works include Queries of Highest Consideration and The
Bloudy Tenant Yet More Bloody, which was a response to John Cottons
response to his earlier work, The Bloudy Tenant of Persecution. FTP,
name this man, who went to England with John Clarke in 1651 to have
William Coddingtons commission withdrawn, after which he returned to
America to serve as President of the colony he had founded after being
banished from Massachusetts in 1635, Rhode Island. {Confessions of an
English Opium Eater} It tells of how the author decided to escape the
Manchester Grammar School because he was so much better at Greek than
his teachers, an event which was memorable because his servant dropped
a trunk full of books outside the resident masters door without waking
anyone. After being befriended by a prostitute named Ann, the author
goes to Eton, where Lord Desart signs a security so he can borrow an
advance against his inheritance. FTP, identify this autobiographical
essay, whose author moved to a small cottage in 1812 to study German
metaphysics and enjoy a habit that would take him 17 years to break, a
story of addiction to laudanum written by Thomas De Quincey. John
{Cage} After a homeless person set fire to the Frankfurt Opera House,
the premiere of his Europeras 1 and 2 had to be postponed. Other works
by this composer include Roaratorio, an Irish Circus on Finnegans Wake
for Eight Irish Musicians; Child of Tree, for Amplified Cactus Plants;
and Fontana Mix, for 10 transparancies permutated quaquaversally in 3
or more dimensions. FTP, identify this American poet, painter, and
composer, better known for such aleatory works as Imaginary
Landscapes, Music of Changes, and 433 (four thirty-three). the {Teapot
Dome} scandal (accept {Elk Hills} before Harry Sinclair is mentioned)
It was brought under public scrutiny by a Senate committee led by
Thomas Walsh, who was investigating a $100,000 loan from a
businessman. The Supreme Court declared the deal invalid in 1927, five
years after Harry Sinclair had secretly received something which had
been set aside for the navy. FTP, identify this scandal, which
resulted in prison terms for Sinclair and Secretary of the Interior
Albert Fall, in which an oil reserve was leased to a private citizen.
Richard {Steele} In 1700, he almost killed a man in a duel, which led
to his attacks on dueling in such works as The Christian Hero. Due to
the tone of pamhplets like The Crisis, he was removed from his seat in
Parliament, but George I gave him the patent for the Drury Lane
theater. FTP, name this author of The Funeral and The Conscious
Lovers, who wrote under the psuedonym Isaac Bickerstaff as editor of
the Englishman, Guardian, Spectator, and Tatler, along with Joseph
Addison. the {muon} In 1960, Vernon Hughes discovered a system in
which an electron circled a positive one of these. Extremely unstable,
they only exist for a few millionths of a second, quickly decaying
into electrons or positrons with less than 1/200 of the original mass,
along with several neutrinos. FTP, identify this particule, whose
existence was proposed in 1935 by Hideki Yukawa, which was discovered
a year later by Carl Anderson. Marco {Polo} He was commander of a
galley at the battle of Curzola when he was taken prisoner by the
Genoese. While in prison, he met Rusticiano of Pisa, who helped him
write a book. FTP, identify this man, who conquered the city of
Saianfu as governor of Yang Chow, who had left Venice in 1271 with his
father and uncle to go to the court of Kublai Khan. Johann {Kuhnau} 15
points: After this German died in 1722, he was succeeded as director
of the Thomasschule in Leipzig by Johann Sebastian Bach. He may be
considered the father of the piano sonata, and his best known work, to
be found in Musical Representations of Some Bible Stories, is The
Combat Between David and Goliath, which may be the first programmatic
piano sonata. Wislawa {Szymborska} Her recent books include The End
and the Beginning, The People on the Bridge, and A Large Number, which
includes Lots Wife and In Praise of My Sister. Her earlier work
includes Salt, No End of Fun, and 1957s Calling Out to Yeti, which
became notorious for symbolizing Stalin as the title figure. FTP,
identify this poet, whose works have been translated in Sounds,
Feelings, Thoughts and View with a Grain of Sand, a graduate of
Jagellonian University who has spent her whole life in Krakow and who
received the 1996 Nobel Prize for Literature. the {Bessemer} process
Before 1856, iron oxide was employed to carry oxygen to the site of
purification. In that year, as an inventor was working on ways of
improving cannons, it occurred to him that oxygen for refining could
come directly from the air if wind was blown over the melted metal.
FTP, identify this method, which was perfected by Alexander Holley,
which eliminated the alloyed impurities in pig iron to produce steel,
a process developed by the Englishman for whom it is named. Lewis
Henry {Morgan} He wrote an authoritative book on The American Beaver
and his Works, in which he claimed that animals possess the ability to
reason. He was a lawyer in Rochester, and served as a state senator in
1868, but is better remembered for his books, one of which was praised
by Marx and Engels as offering confirmation of their materialist view
of history. FTP, identify this ethnologist, whose works on Native
American culture include The League of the Iroquois and Systems of
Consanguinity and Affinity, best known for his 1877 book on the
origins of government, Ancient Society. The {Possessed} or The
{Devils} or The {Demons} or {Besy} It begins with an epigraph from
chapter 8 of Luke, referring to Jesus casting devils into swine. The
main character marries Marya Timofeyevna, a cripple, but commits
suicide after she is killed along with her brother. Peter Verkhovensky
unsuccessfully tries to get him to join a conspiracy, and then asks
him to confess to having murdered Shatov in his suicide note. FTP,
identify this novel, which ends with the deaths of Lizaveta at the
hands of a mob, along with the suicides of Kirilov and Nikolay
Stavrogin, written by Feodor Dostoyevsky. {Malpighian} or Marcello
{Malpighi} The layer of this name lies at the base of the vertebrate
epidermis and contains melanin granules. The body or corpuscle of this
name contains a group of capillaries, the glomerulus, and the cup-
shaped object which surrounds them, the Bowmans capsule. FTP, give
this common name, which also describes a kind of tubule which acts as
an excretory organ in insects, as well as designating the Italian
scientist who discovered them all. Maya {Angelou} She was rejected
from the Army in the 1940's after a check revealed that her alma
mater, the California Labor School, was considered subversive. A
decade later, she worked as a madam for two prostitutes in San
Francisco, where she had been the first black female street-car
conductor. FTP, identify this woman, who was born Marguerite Annie
Johnson, and who tells the story of her childhood rape at the hands of
her mother's boyfriend in I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings. Jose de
{San Martin} He served in the Spanish army in the attack on Oran,
fought against the British and the Portuguese, and served with
distinction in the Peninsular War. After going to Buenos Aries,
however, he switched sides, leading an army across the Andes to win
victories over the Spanish at Chacubuco and Maipu. FTP, identify this
Argentine soldier, who died in exile in France in 1850 after having
fallen out with Bolivar, who captured Lima and, in 1821, became the
Protector of Peru. Tithonus A dramatic monologue written by Tennyson
in the person of this character gave Aldous Huxley the title for After
Many a Summer Dies the Swan. The son of Strymo and grandson of the
river Scamander, he was the father of Emathion and Memnon, and was
taken from Troy first to Ethiopia and then to a palace in the river
Oceanus. FTP, identify this brother of Priam, who was either turned
into a cicada or a grasshopper after his lover, Eos, asked that he be
granted immortality, but forgot to ask for eternal youth. James
{Wilson} He died in Edenton, North Carolina in 1798, having fled there
to avoid being arrested for debt. After arriving in America in 1766,
he got a job as a Latin tutor at the College of Philadelphia, after
which he moved to Carlisle, where he led a Committee of Correspondence
and published his Considerations on the Nature and Extent of the
Legislative Authority of the British Parliament. FTP, identify this
signer of the Declaration of Independence, who served on the Supreme
Court for nine years and wrote the decision in Chisholm vs. Georgia,
but who is better known for having joined with Gouverneur Morris to
write the final draft of the Constitution. the {I Ching} The first
commentaries on it were written by King Wen, and include the
Judgments, referring to the consequences of the action, and the
Images, which explain the meaning. According to myth, the system was
created by Fu Hsi, who also made the first circular arrangement. FTP,
identify this book, which describes eight trigrams and sixty-four
hexagrams whose broken and solid lines represent the yin and yang, a
book of divination favored by Confucians. Charles {Kingsley} His first
novel, Yeast, dealt with the rural poor, while his second, Alton
Locke, focused on a tailor and poet who became a leader of the
Chartists. His Hereward the Wake, set during the Norman Conquest,
showed his anti-Catholic bias, which was also reflected in the attack
this Anglican priest from Eversley made on Cardinal Newman, who was
prompted to write his Apologia pro vita sua in response. FTP, identify
this Victorian writer, whose better known works include Hypatia, The
Water-Babies, and Westward Ho! Robert {Schumann} His executor ruled
that his Violin Concerto should not be performed until the centennial
of his death, but in the 1930s, a Hungarian violinist named Jelly
dAranyi claimed that the composers ghost had appeared to her to tell
her where the manuscript was and to perform it. Of course, its
location in a Berlin library was common knowledge, and another
violinist premiered the work in 1937, just 81 years after the
composers death. His Opus 1 was a set of variations on the name of a
countess he admired, while his love for a woman from Asch led him to
use the sequence of notes A, E-flat, C and B for his piano works
Papillons and Carnaval. FTP, name this insane German composer, better
known for Krisleriana, Scenes of Childhood, and the Spring Symphony.
Christian {Rosenkreuz} While making a pilgrimage to Jerusalem at the
age of 16, he heard of some Arabian wise men and made a detour to
Damcar, where he learned Arabic and mathematics and translated the
Liber M into Latin. 120 years after he died, his body was discovered
in perfect condition, and he was holding a little book covered in
gold, the Fama Fraternitatis. FTP, identify this mythical figure, who
spent five years in secrecy in Germany before calling for five of his
friends, forming the Brotherhood of Rosicrucians. William {Ramsay}
After earning his Ph.D. at Tubingen at the age of 19, he began
research on pyridine, and was one of the first to suggest a good
explanation for Brownian motion. Along with Soddy, he argued that
excess helium might be connected to radioactivity, and the two of them
did work on "emanation," a gas linked to thorium and radium. FTP,
identify this British chemist, who followed up on Rayleigh's
consideration of the discrepancy between atmospheric and pure nitrogen
by postulating a new heavy gas, leading to his discovery of argon,
helium, krypton, neon, and xenon. {Cry, the Beloved Country} The
protagonist gets a letter from Msimangu, who says that his sister
Gertrude is a prostitute and dealer in illegal alcohol. After meeting
his brother John, he discovers that his son, along with Johns son, had
killed Arthur Jarvis, and after a trial his son is sentenced to be
hanged, while Johns son is acquitted. FTP, identify this novel, whose
characters include Absalom and his father, the Reverend Stephen
Kumalo, a Zulu clergyman, which was written by Alan Paton. {Guinea-
Bissau} Cape Roxo is the northwesternmost point of this country, while
the Sad Islands are in the southwestern corner. The islands of
Caravela, Jeta, Pecixe, Big Orange, and Formosa lie in the Archipelago
of Bijagos on the coast of this nation, whose main rivers are the
Cacheu, Corubal, and Geba. FTP, identify this African country, whoise
cities include Gabu, Bafata, and a capital which shares its name with
part of the countrys name, a republic bordered by Senegal to the north
and Guinea to the east which has recently been rocked by civil war.
Wolfgang {Pauli} He and Carl Jung published a book together in 1952 in
which they sought to explain the irrational bases of scientific
activity. He studied under Sommerfeld, who asked him to write the
article on relativity theory for Klein's encyclopedia, and he
suggested that the Zeeman effect could be seen as resulting >from
properties of valence electrons, not the atomic core. FTP, name this
physicist, who in 1930 explained the spectrum of beta decay by
postulating the emission of a neutral particle, best known for his
1925 statement that there can never be two or more equivalent
electrons in an atom, the exclusion principle named for him. Antoine
{Arnauld} This Frenchman wrote the fourth set of objections. The co-
author, with Pierre Nicole, of a book on logic, he was exiled in 1679,
and his On True and False Ideas is a lengthy attack on Malebranche,
who he despised so much that he got his Treatise on Nature and Grace
put on the index of forbidden books. Winesburg, Ohio This literary
work's last three sections, entitled "Death", "Sophistication", and
"Departure", all concern people who have decided to leave town
forever, while four sections collectively entitled "Godliness" tell of
Jesse Bentley's belief that he is one of God's chosen. "An Awakening"
describes the central character's failure to tell Belle Carpenter of
an epiphany, and "Nobody Knows" relates how he slept with Louise
Trunnion. The recluse Wing Biddlebaum is described in the first story,
which follows an introduction in which an aging author writes what he
calls "The Book of the Grotesque". United by the character George
Willard, FTP, this is a description of what work by Sherwood Anderson
named for the town in which it is set? special relativity One of this
theory's conclusions is that the mass of an object is given by the
rest mass of the body divided by the square root of 1 minus the
velocity squared divided by the speed of light squared. Later extended
to accelerated systems, it assumes that the speed of light in a vacuum
is constant throughout the universe and that physical laws are
identical in all frames of reference, and concludes that if a body
loses energy L, its mass diminishes by L over c squared, leading its
developer to propose the equation E equals m c squared. FTP, what is
this 1905 theory of motion developed by Einstein? Pea Ridge (accept
Elkhorn Tavern before mentioned) The confederate forces in this battle
included Ben McCulloch's army and the recently-retreated Missouri
forces of Stirling Price. Also known as Elkhorn Tavern, it saw intense
fighting at the "Telegraph Road", and when the Confederate wings of
Earl Van Dorn were separated they were crushed on successive days by
the well-entrenched forces of Samuel Curtis. Occurring on March 6-8,
1862, FTP, what was this battle, the only major Civil War battle in
the state of Arkansas? velocity of circulation The income version can
be calculated by dividing the Gross National Product by the total
money supply. Influenced by the prevailing interest rate, it’s value
is almost always above 1, as seen in the transactions version, which
is calculated by dividing total sales volume by the total money supply
in circulation, thus determining how many times the same monetary unit
was spent in a given period of time. FTP, what is this measure of the
speed with which money circulates within an economy? Pangloss This man
gets syphilis from the chambermaid Pacquette, and later is sent to the
galleys for ogling a woman in a mosque, where he chained to the same
bench as the man known as the Baron. Earlier, a torrential downpour
saved him from being burned at the stake by the Grand Inquisitor, and
even his experience being dissected by a surgeon while still alive
does nothing to alter his optimism. FTP, who is this philosopher who
insists “all is for the best in this best of possible worlds” in
“Candide”? the golden apples of the Hesperides Their location was
reluctantly revealed by the sea-god Nereus, and Prometheus devised the
plan to recover them. Since they were a wedding present from Hera to
Zeus, they were guarded by daughters of Atlas, as well as the dragon
Ladon. Thus, Heracles took the world on his shoulders and had Atlas
himself procure them. FTP, what were these valuable pieces of fruit,
the subject of Heracles' 11th labor? (Karl) Adolf Eichmann Imprisoned
by the United States in 1945, this man escaped several months later,
all the while keeping his identity secret. Originally a traveling
vacuum cleaner salesman, he joined the Austrian Nazi Party in 1932,
and by 1935 was in charge of the Gestapo's anti-Jewish section in
Berlin. At the Wannsee Conference he was appointed organizer of the
movement of Jews to concentration camps, but after the war escaped to
Argentina. FTP, who was this notorious Nazi administrator who in 1960
was abducted by Israelis and executed as a war criminal? Jacobus van't
Hoff This chemist's major ideas were collected in 1884's "Etudes de
dynamique chimique". His work concerning the four valencies of a
carbon atom allowed him to explain the "asymmetric" carbon atom
occurring in optically active compounds. He developed the concept of
chemical affinity as the maximum work obtainable from a reaction,
while his equation relating the equilibrium constant with temperature
is known as his "isochore". Also known for a namesake "factor"
appearing in formulas for colligitive properties, FTP, who was this
Dutch chemist, winner of the first chemistry Nobel Prize? Immanuel
Kant In one of his early works this thinker presented his most famous
idea in five forms, including the formula of autonomy, the formula of
the end-in- itself, and the formula of the Kingdom of Ends. Using his
famous "transcendental deduction" he concluded that the claims of
speculative metaphysics are worthless in the so-called "Analytic" part
of one of his major works, while in another work, the "Prolegomena to
any Future Metaphysics", he discussed his distinction between noumena
and the "thing-in-itself". FTP, who was this German philosopher best-
known for his categorical imperative and his three "Critiques"? Brook
Farm It was originally financed as a joint stock company with 24
shares of stock at $500 per share, and was reorganized three years
after its founding through the efforts of Albert Brisbane. Originally
founded by the Unitarian minister George Ripley in West Roxbury,
Massachusetts, its community school was a success, but it was
unprofitable due to its sandy soil and dependence on the manual labor
of its members, which included John Dwight, Isaac Hecker, and
Nathanael Hawthorne. FTP, what was this cooperative farm?
parasympathetic nervous system (prompt on autonomic nervous system) It
dilates blood vessels, promotes digestion by increasing peristalsis,
increases salivary gland secretion, and decreases heart rate.
Comprising the lower spinal nerves and the cranial nerves, its actions
tend to antagonize the actions of its partner system, and is
responsible for automatic activities that occur when exertion is not
required. FTP, what is this part of the autonomic nervous system, the
counterpart of the sympathetic nervous system? The Crying of Lot 49
The action of this novel is set in motion when the protagonist becomes
an executor of the will of her former lover Pierce Invererity,
prompting a trip to San Narcisso, where she immediately begins an
affair with the lawyer Metzger. While performing her duties, the
protagonist gradually becomes aware of the underground W.A.S.T.E
postal system and an ancient conspiracy against the Thurn and Taxis
European postal monolopy by the mysterious Tristero System. FTP, what
is this novel about the discoveries of Oedipa Maas, written by Thomas
Pyncheon? Bay of Fundy This body of water runs 170 miles from
northeast to southwest, and maintains a width from 30 to 50 miles. In
the north are the Minas Basin and Chignecto Bay. It is famous for its
tide and tidal bore, which causes water levels to fluctuate up to 70
feet and which causes the reversing falls of the St. John River. FTP,
what is this bay found between New Brunswick and Nova Scotia? Meiji
(or Mutsuhito) During his reign this ruler put down the Sutsama
Rebellion and adopted the Gregorian calender. The son of Komei, he
regulated the samurai, abolished surfdom, and oversaw the mass
Westernization of Japanese culture. Ito Hirobumi framed the namesake
constitution he approved just before leading Japan in the Chinese-
Japanese and Russo-Japanese Wars. FTP, who was this 1st post-Tokugawa
shogunate ruler who led the "restoration" of the same name? sulphuric
acid (prompt on sulphuric acid or tetraoxosulphuric(VI) acid) This
acid is rarely used in pure form, and is commonly used in a 96-98%
solution. A strong protonating agent, it protonates chlorides and
nitrates, producing hydrogen chloride and nitric acid, while as a
moderately strong oxidizing agent it will dissolve copper. The most
produced chemical product in the UK, it is now made using the contact
process method, which replaced the lead-chamber process. Also known as
oil of vitriol, FTP, what is this acid with formula H2 SO4? The
Madonna of the Long Neck In the bottom right of this painting can be
seen a haggard prophet holding a scroll far in the distance, while to
his left is an oddly proportioned column jutting out behind the
central figure's shoulder. The attending angels are all crammed into
the narrow space to the left of the title figure, who is holding her
child with elongated fingers. FTP, what is this mannerist painting by
Parmigianino named for the odd proportions of the title woman? The
Merchant of Venice Characters in this play include the almost
indistinguishable companions Salerio and Solanio and the servant
Launcelot Gobbo. According to the terms of her father's will, the
protagonist can only marry the suitor who correctly chooses a casket
containing her portrait, saving her from marrying the Princes of
Morocco and Arragon. Bassanio chooses the correct casket, but soon
learns that his friend Antonio has defaulted on the loan that financed
his trip to Belmont. However, the disguised Portia saves Antonio by
outwitting the moneylender Shylock. FTP, what is this play by
Shakespeare? Teutonic Knights (or Order of St. Mary of the Germans)
Dissolved in Germany in 1809, this group was founded in Acre in 1190,
and rapidly grew under Hermann of Salza when they answered Conrad of
Mazovia's call for help. Firmly established by the Golden Bull of
Rimini in 1226, they became the symbol of crusading chivalry and
attained their greatest successes under Winrich of Kniprode,
controlling much of the Baltic, Prussia, and Pomerania. Officially
known as the Order of St. Mary of the Germans, FTP, what was this
order of knights famously defeated at Tannenburg? William James
Originally dedicated to the study of medicine, this thinker switched
to psychology after a trip to South America to study botany with Louis
Agassiz. Founder of the first American psychology lab, he advocated a
"stream of consciousness" approach to psychology in his seminal 1890
work "Principles of Psychology". James-Lange theory James teamed with
a Danish physiologist to develop this theory of emotions which holds
that emotions are provoked by the visceral changes arising from the
reaction to the emotion-causing stimulus. James' famous argument for
it held that one does not run from a bear in the woods because one is
afraid, but rather running provokes the fear. Fajans' rules These
three rules indicate the extent to which an ionic bond has covalent
character caused by polarization of the ions, stating that covalent
character is more likely if the charge of the ions is high, the
positive ion is small or the negative ion is large, and if the
positive-ion has a non-noble gas outer-electron configuration. Hard
Times Centering on the grim family of Thomas Grangrind, it was written
by Charles Dickens. Peter Kapitza Although your question writer is
fond of this Soviet physicist's comparison of science to a relentless
crocodile, this man is better known as the first to develop high-
intensity magnetic fields and for his work on helium II and
superfluidity. He "jacked" a piece of the 1978 Nobel Prize from
Penzias and Wilson. Grignard reagents These compounds add to
carboxylic acids to produce first a ketone and ultimately a tertiary
alcohol, which is also the result when they are added to ketones. When
added to most aldehydes they form secondary alcohols, the exception
being when added to formaldehyde, which produces a primary alcohol.
Rarely isolated but extensively used in organic synthesis, they were
discovered in 1900 by the chemist for whom they are named. With
general formula R Mg X, FTP, what are these reagents? motet In its
later use this musical form often utilized a vernacular text, as seen
in the six written by Bach. The early, or Medieval, type developed
from the clausula, the only difference being the addition of an
amorous French text in the uppermost of the three voices. The more
famous type is the later Renaissance, or Flemish, version, in which
four or five voices sing a single Latin text using the style of
imitation with which it is associated. FTP, what is this most
important form of early polyphonic music whose name comes from the
French for "word"? The Great Gatsby In this novel ,the narrator
becomes suspicious of the business practices of the titular character
after meeting his associate Mr. Wolfsheim, but he soon forgets his
concerns after falling for his cousin's friend Jordan Baker. The
climax occurs when the narrator finds the body of George Wilson, who
has killed the title figure in revenge for the death of George's wife
Myrtle in a car accident, but in reality it was Daisy Buchanan and not
the title figure who was behind the wheel of the car. Such is a brief
description of, FTP, what novel narrated by Nick Carraway, the best-
known work by F. Scott Fitzgerald? Siegfried or Sigurd This
mythological figure was educated by the blacksmith Regin, who forged
for him his matchless sword Gram. Riding his horse Greyfell he slew
the dragon Fafnir, and learned the language of the birds by eating
Fafnir's heart. Invulnerable except for a point between his shoulders
where a leaf fell while he was bathing in Fafnir's blood, he is
eventually killed by Hagen, having earlier given the Rheingold to his
wife Kriemhild, whose brother Gunther he aids as part of his greatest
exploit. FTP, who is this hero of the first part of the Nibelungenlied
who rescues Brunhild? Lutzen At the beginning of this battle the
attack of the Protestant forces was delayed by fog, bringing the
numerically superior imperial forces close to victory. However, the
Protestants were rallied by Bernard, Duke of Saxe- Weimar, leading to
a victory over Wallenstein. FTP, what was this November 16, 1632
battle which saw the death of Gustavus Adolphus? Albert Abraham
Michelson In 1920 this man accurately measured the diameter of
Betelgeuse, making him the first to accurately determine the size of a
star. The first head of the physics department at the University of
Chicago, in 1923 he returned to the problem which obsessed him
throughout his life, utilizing a 35-kilometer pathway between two
mountain peaks and later an evacuated tube equipped with an eight-
sided mirror to make extremely accurate measurements of the speed of
light, but he is better-known for winning the 1907 Physics Nobel Prize
and for his work with the interferometer he built. FTP, who was this
physicist who with Edward Morley disproved the theory of ether? Macao
Historic features in this region include the fort and chapel of Guia,
St. Domingo's Church and Convent, the remaining facade of St. Paul's
Basilica, and a statue to Luis de Camoes, who wrote part of the
Lusiads there. Including the two small islands of Taipa and Coloane,
its main section is a high, rocky peninsula connected by a narrow 700
foot wide sandy isthmus to Zhongshan Island. The most densely
populated region in the world, FTP, what is this 6 square mile former
Portuguese colony which in 1999 came under control of China? Carlos
Fuentes This author's first story collection was The Masked Days,
while recent novels include Christopher Unborn, Distant Relations,
Terra Nostra, and The Hydra Head. He told of the last days of Ambrose
Bierce in The Old Gringo, while works like Where the Air Is Clear, A
Change of Skin, and The Good Conscience all examined his native
Mexico. FTP, who is this novelist best known for The Death of Artemio
Cruz? Miltiades After serving as archon from 524-23 BCE, this man was
sent to the Chersonese, where he joined Darius I's Scythian expedition
as a Persian vassal. He took advantaged of the Ionian Revolt to occupy
Lemnos, but was soon forced to flee to Athens, where he was acquitted
of tyranny. He was condemned just before his death for raising an army
against Paros to avenge a personal grudge, which caused problems for
his son Cimon. FTP, who was this military leader responsible for the
Athenian victory at Marathon? paramagnetism The Van Vleck type of this
phenomenon is independent of temperature, and is found in many solid
metallic elements. The strong version is seen in compounds containing
palladium, platinum, iron, and the rare-earth elements, and decreases
as temperature rises due to the increased random motion of the atoms
involved. FTP, what is this type of magnetism in which unpaired
electrons make atoms behave like tiny permanent magnets that align
with and strengthen an applied magnetic field? Alfred Hitchcock While
working for Transatlantic Films this director developed an innovative
technique called the "ten-minute take". During his early career he
worked in Britain, where he directed the nation's first sound feature
film, "Blackmail", and established his reputation with the thriller
"The Lodger". After successes like The Lady Vanishes and The 39 Steps
he moved to Hollywood, where he directed such classics as Rope,
Spellbound, and Strangers on a Train. FTP, who is this "master of
suspense" responsible for Vertigo and Psycho? Anthony Trollope This
author's mother Frances was also an author who wrote the novel "The
Vicar of Wrexhill" and the controversial travel account "Domestic
Manners of the Americans". This man, longtime postal surveyor to
Ireland, wrote novels like Sir Harry Hotspur of Humblethwaite, Orley
Farm, and the Eustace Diamonds, but is best-known for two series, one
of which is known as either the Parliamentary Novels or the Palliser
Novels. FTP, who is this British novelist best known for his 6 novels
of clerical intrigue found in the "Chronicles of Barsetshire",
including "Barchester Towers"? Mark Rothko Many of this artist's later
works reflect the somber mood that led to his suicide, such as his
series of murals for the nondenominational church of Houston, Texas,
which he considered his best work. Probably best-known for a series of
nine paintings originally intended to decorate a restaurant of the
Seagram Building, his contemplative style reflected his advocacy of
"the simple expression of the complex thought", seen in works like
"Slow Swirl by the Edge of the Sea". A leader of the New York school
and a founder of Colour Field Painting, FTP, who was this Russian-born
American artist of "Subway (Subterranean Fantasy)", "Black on Maroon",
and "Red on Maroon"? Ferdinand de Saussure This thinker introduced the
terms “parole” and “langue”, the former defined as the speech of an
individual, the latter representing a systematic, structured language.
While still a student he established his reputation with his only
book, “Memoir on the Original Vowels in the Indo-European Languages”,
but is most important for his time as teacher at the School of
Advanced Studies in Paris and later at the University of Geneva, where
two students, Charles Bally and Albert Sechehaye, collected his
lectures into a groundbreaking 1916 work. FTP, who was this man best-
known for “Course in General Linguistics”? The Bridge The "Quaker
Hill" section was apparently an afterthought in this poem, whose
famous images of the seagull and the elevator are found in its unnamed
opening section, while the work is unified by its eighth and final
section, "Atlantis". The opening "Ave Maria" section is a monologue by
Christopher Columbus. Subsequent sections like "Powhatan's Daughter",
"Cutty Sark", "Cape Hatteras", and "Three Songs", lead up to its most
famous and oft anthologized section, "The Tunnel". FTP, what is this
American epic whose central image is the Brooklyn landmark of the
title, the most famous work of Hart Crane? transposons or transposable
elements (prompt on jumping genes) Complex types of these elements can
carry other genes, such as antibiotic resistance genes, while the
simplest ones are called insertion sequences. They explain how
originally identical cells take on specialized functions as skin,
muscle, bone, and nerve, and were first observed in maize. Genes that
can change their position on a chromosome from generation to
generation, FTP, what are these discoveries of Barbara McClintock
popularly known as "jumping genes"? Martin Heidegger When forbidden to
teach by occupation authorities after WWII this thinker retreated to
the Black Forest to learn the secret of existence from nature. He
described the three basic features of the structure of being as
facticity, existentiality, and fallenness, and considered "angst" to
be a creative force and basic characteristic of an authentic
existence. His lecture on metaphysical "nothingness" marked the
beginning of his teaching career at Freiberg University, where his
notorious rectorial address would mark his association with the Nazi
party. FTP, who was this philosopher best-known for 1927's "Being and
Time"? Salmoneus On the day of Zeus' festival this man rode through
town in a chariot throwing fire-brands and accompanied by a loud
clanging of brass, claiming that he was Zeus and should be worshipped.
Not surprisingly, Zeus was peeved, and the resultant throw-down was
one-sided, as Zeus simply killed him with a thunderbolt. Boyle's law
Along with Joule's law, deviations from this law are given by the
Joule- Thomson effect, and the inversion temperature tells when the
deviations from Joule's law and this law offset each other. Discovered
independently by Mariotte, for whom it is sometimes named, this gas
law was originally discovered using the air pump. FTP, what is this
law which claims that the volume of a gas at constant temperature is
inversely proportional to its pressure? mercantilism The title and
subject of a seminal 1931 work by Eli Heckscher, this theory was often
instituted in part by sumptuary laws to ensure wants were held low,
while large populations were encouraged to provide a supply of labor.
Practiced by Thomas Mun in England, Antonio Serra in Italy, and Jean-
Baptiste Colbert in France, it promoted government regulation of the
economy to augment state power at the expense of rival national powers
through means like the accumulation of precious metals. FTP, what was
this economic system most associated with the use of colonies as
markets for exports and suppliers of raw materials for the mother
country? Nicholas Nickleby The title character of this novel
eventually marries Madeline Bray after she is saved at the last second
from a scheme to marry her to the aged miser Gride. The protagonist’s
sister Kate must endure attempts to engage her to Lord Verisopht and
Mulberry Hawk, while the protagonist is saved by Newman Noggs from
false charges of theft brought against him when he saved the boy Smike
from a beating by the sinister boarding school headmaster Wackford
Squeers. FTP, what is this novel about a bankrupt man manipulated by
his miserly uncle Ralph, written by Charles Dickens? Zoroastrianism
According to this religion, each person after death crosses the
Chinvato Peretav, or Bridge of the Separator, which will contract if
the person is evil, sending him or her to hell. It emphasizes the
differences between the asha, or People of Righteousness, and the
druj, or People of the Lie, and holds that history consists of 4
periods of 3,000 years each, during the last of which the savior
Saoshyant will appear. Throughout history, the forces of evil, led by
Ahriman, are fought by the good spirits, led by Ahura Mazda. FTP, what
is this Persian religion named for its founder? Waterloo A key moment
in this battle was the capture of the farmhouse La Haye Sainte by the
French, who used the site to begin an artillery attack on the Allied
center. At 7pm the Garde Imperiale was launched to try to break the
weakened Allied infantry. However, the French delay at the start of
fighting to allow the ground to dry from a violent storm the night
before gave Blucher enough time to arrive with the main Prussian
force, allowing he and Wellington to rout Napoleon. FTP, what was this
June 18, 1815 battle, the final defeat of Napoleon? Robert Brown In
1831, this man discovered that a small body fundamental in the
creation of plant tissues occurs regularly in plant cells, coining the
term "nucleus" to describe them. An 1801-05 expedition to Australia
collecting 4,000 plant species was vital to his work, which included
his description of the organs and mode of reproduction in orchids and
his establishment of the basis for distinction between gymnosperms and
angiosperms, but today he is best- remembered for an idea which sprung
from his 1827 observation of fine pollen grains suspended in water.
FTP, who was this Scottish botanist whose name is used to describe a
certain type of random motion? Ogier the Dane According to one myth ,
Morgan le Fay restored this legendary figure's youth when he was 100
years old and sent him to fight for France, after which she took him
back from the world to keep until he was needed again. According to
the main myth concerning him he was held as a hostage for his father
Geoffrey of Dannemarch. By his deeds in Italy he gained the favor of
Charlemagne, but after killing the queen's nephew as vengeance for his
own son's death he was forced to redeem himself by fighting the
Saracens in Spain. Based on the Frankish warrior Autgarius, FTP, who
was this Paladin of Charlemagne, known as "the Dane"? Arthur Conan
Doyle This author wrote a series of Napoleonic tales centering on
Brigadier Gerard, while the adventures of a company of Saxon bowmen in
the Hundred Years War is the subject of his novel "The White Company".
Also known for the fantasy "The Lost World" and a "History of
Spiritualism", he is best-known for a character created to pay for an
unsuccessful medical practice and based on his former medical
instructor Dr. Joseph Bell. FTP, who is this author of The Valley of
Fear, The Sign of Four, and The Hound of the Baskervilles? The Tempest
The upper branches of a tree extend into the upper left of this
painting whose center is dominated by a bridge spanning a river.
Outside of the town depicted in the background is a man in a red coat
in the far left, who is looking at a woman breast feeding her child,
while the lighting effects for which it is most noted are seen in the
top background. FTP, what is this 1508 work depicting the prelude to a
storm, the most famous work of Giorgione? Lucius Aelius Sejanus This
man's ambitions were ended when he was denounced and executed by
Macro. The son of Seius Strabo, he had planned to serve as regent to
the young Gemellus, having earlier allegedly seduced Germanicus'
sister Livilla and induced her to poison her husband Drusus. Prefect
of the Praetorian Guard starting in AD 14, FTP, who was this ambitious
and universally hated man who exerted almost complete control over
Rome after Tiberius' retirement to Capri? Coulomb The "explosion" of
this name is the sudden disruption of a molecule from which the
electrons have been stripped to leave only the nuclei, which repel
each other because of their electric charge. When written as an
equation, the law of this name involves the constant 1 over 4 pi times
the absolute permittivity of the intervening medium, and states that
the force between two particles is directly proportional to the
product of their charges and inversely proportional to the square of
the distance between them. FTP, what is this name also used for the SI
unit of electric charge? Niger River Just below this river's Sokoto
tributary is Kainji Lake. Irrigation is provided by the Sansanding Dam
on its delta, a confusing array of channels and shallow lakes which is
the largest in the continent. It is navigable to ships below Lokoja,
where it is met by its main tributary, the Benue. The mystery of its
course was solved by the explorer Mungo Park, who established the
eastward flow of its early course, which begins in southwest Guinea.
Flowing 2,600 miles, FTP, what is this chief river of west Africa?
Typhoid Mary or Mary Mallon This person first became wanted by the
police in 1904 when working in a home in Oyster Bay, New York, eluding
them until 1907, when she was committed to Riverside Hospital on New
York's isolated North Brother Island. Released after promising not to
take another job in food preparation, she was returned to Riverside
after working as a cook in two hospitals. In all, she was believed to
be responsible for 51 cases of a disease to which she was immune. FTP,
who was this first known carrier of typhoid in the United States?
Charles Louis de Secondat, Baron de la Brede et de Montesquieu In this
philosopher's most famous work he classified forms of government based
on their "animating principle", identifying republics with virtue,
monarchies with honor, and despotism with fear. 1734's "Reflections on
the Causes of the Grandeur and Declension of the Romans" followed a
series of 160 epistolary satires of Parisian society published as
"Persian Letters", but he is best-known for a 1748 work in which he
relates human and natural law and advocates separation of powers in
government. FTP, who was this French philosopher, author of "The
Spirit of the Laws"? Joseph E. Johnston This Civil War leader died of
pneumonia after serving as a pallbearer at William Sherman's funeral.
Severe wounds forced him to give up command of the Army of Northern
Virginia during the Peninsular Campaign, but in November 1862 he took
command of all Confederate Armies in the west, where he lost Vicksburg
to Grant. However, he is best-known for his delaying tactics during
Sherman's march on Atlanta. FTP, who was this military leader not to
be confused with Albert Sidney? The Water Music Although this musical
work originally consisted of some 20 pieces, it is almost always
performed today in an orchestral transcription by Hamilton Harty which
contains six of the pieces. It begins with an Overture in the French
style, followed by an English Air and a fast Bouree dance. Next comes
the Hornpipe dance, followed by another song and a concluding royal
pomp. FTP, what was this set of pieces by George Friedrich Handel
first performed during a July 1717 royal pageant down the Thames?
mitochondrial DNA (accept early answer of mtDNA) The human type codes
for 13 proteins and some RNA, and makes up less then 1% of the total
cellular DNA. It is extremely useful for studying recent genetic
history since it mutates rapidly and is inherited solely through the
female line. A circular ring of DNA found in a certain organelle, FTP,
what is this type of genetic material abbreviated mtDNA? William
"Studs" Lonigan This literary character is first seen as a boy of
fifteen who soon has his first sexual experience with a girl named
Iris and who becomes attached to Lucy Scanlan. During the 1920s he
works as a house painter and sees his friend Weary Reilly rape Irene
at a wild New Year's Eve party. His affair with Catherine Banahan and
death from pneumonia are recorded in Judgment Day, the third in a
trilogy which also describes his "youth" and "young manhood". FTP, who
is this character, the most famous creation of James T. Farrell? Dutch
East India Company At its height it subjugated the Moluccas, Ambonia,
Malacca, Macassar, and Bantam. Originally formed in 1602 under the
aegis of Prince Maurice, it ran at a loss during the 18th century and
was liquidated in 1799, but during the 17th century was extremely
effective in opposing Spanish ambitions and coordinating the
activities of companies competing for trade in the namesake area. FTP,
what was this company which created a virtual monopoly in the spice
trade? Chicago, Burlington, and Quincy Railroad v. Chicago The court
undermined earlier Granger decisions with this 1897 decision which
overturned Barron v. Baltimore. Holding that the 14th Amendment
required states to uphold 5th Amendment guarantees of fair
compensation in eminent domain cases, it marked the first extension of
the Bill of Rights to proceedings in state trials. The Barber of
Seville Although first produced in 1816, this opera is one of the last
examples of the style of Italian comic opera popular in the 18th
century, and is the last major opera to use the secco recitative.
Major moments include the "singing lesson" scene and the aria "Largo
al factorum", one of the greatest examples of buffo aria in rapid
declamation. In it, a count gains admittance to the house of his
romantic rival, Dr. Bartolo, by disguising himself first as a drunken
sailor and then as a music teacher, and shortly thereafter a notary
who was to marry Rosina to Bartolo is convinced to marry Rosina to
Almaviva instead. FTP, what is this Rossini opera in which Almaviva is
aided by the resourceful barber Figaro? ethers Catalytic hydration of
olefins is the major method for manufacturing these compounds, which
when reacted with strong inorganic acids and Lewis acids form salts
called oxonium compounds. Heat decomposes them into olefins, while in
the presence of oxygen, they slowly oxidize to unstable peroxides,
which can result in explosion. Used extensively for extraction and
separation of organic chemicals, they are very similar to alcohols.
Codeine is an example of, FTP, what class of organic compounds
characterized by an oxygen atom attached to two carbon atoms that are
part of a hydrocarbon? Mercutio This literary character's most famous
speech concerns his description of the fairy Queen Mab, and he is last
seen just before his death being aided by his friend Benvolio. The
kinsman of Prince Escalas, he is known for his elegance, high-spirits,
and biting wit, but is killed in a fight with Tybalt, prompting his
friend to take revenge by killing Tybalt. FTP, who is this character
found in Romeo and Juliet? Snake River Shortly after its formation
this river flows through Jackson Lake and joins the Henrys Fork River.
Flowing 1,038 miles from its source in Yellowstone National Park, it
joins tributaries like the Clearwater, Salmon, and Boise rivers while
flowing generally westward, often as part of the border of Idaho. Once
known as the Lewis River, FTP, what is this chief tributary of the
Columbia River? Incan empire During its formative years this empire's
leader Viracocha allied himself with the Quechua people, but soon
great conquests were made under Pachacuti and his son, Tupac Yupanqui.
Founded by the legendary Manco Capac, it reached its greatest extent
and power under Huayna Capac, but its fall was set in motion when
Huayna split the kingdom between his sons Huascar and Atahualpa. FTP,
what was this South American empire defeated by Pizarro? Ludwig
Feuerbach Author of the works "God, Freedom, and Immortality" and
"Abelard and Heloise", this philosopher defined religion as "the dream
of the human mind". Attacking his former teacher Hegel's idealism and
the Christian theology of his time, he argued in works like "On
Philosophy and Christianity" that divinity is man's projection of his
own human nature. FTP, name this Bavarian philosopher best-known for
"The Essence of Christianity". gamma ray bursts Instances of this
phenomenon are uniformly distributed over the sky, and can last from a
few tens of milliseconds to several hundred seconds. First detected in
the 1970s by US Vela satellites, they have been studied in detail by
the Compton Observatory, and possible sources for them include the
galactic halo, neutron stars, or distant galaxies, but no definitely
known celestial source has been determined. FTP, what are these bursts
of a certain type of electromagnetic radiation? Cannery Row The
narrative of this work is often interrupted by descriptions of
characters like the artist Henri, the mentally handicapped boy
Frankie, and Dora Flood, who runs the Bear Flag Restaurant, a local
brothel. Its plot tells how Eddie, Hazel, Gay, and Mack enlist the aid
of local grocer Lee Chong to throw a party for Doc, who runs the
Western Biological Laboratory. However, it is less important for its
plot than for its depictions of the bums and prostitutes who inhabit
the title district of Monterrey, California. FTP, what is this book by
John Steinbeck? basilisk or cockatrice It was said that this creature
would be killed instantly if it heard the crowing of a rooster. Born
from a spherical, yokeless egg laid during the days of Sirius and
hatched by a toad, its breath could wilt vegetation and shatter
stones, and if a man on horseback tried to kill it with a spear, the
poison conducted through the spear would kill both the rider and the
horse. One version burned everything it approached, while the other
could kill with a glance, but it could be frightened to death by
holding a mirror to its eyes. FTP, what were these mythical creatures
with the body of a snake and head of a cock? Francis Marion (prompt on
the Swamp Fox) This man led the daring rescue of Americans surrounded
by British troops at Parker’s Ferry and took part in the Battle of
Eutaw Springs. A member of the South Carolina Provincial Congress in
1775 and the South Carolina Senate from 1782-90, he is most famous for
his command of militia troops which used guerilla tactics to harass
the British. FTP, who was this brigadier general whose tactics earned
him the nickname “the Swamp Fox”? Venus, Cupid, Folly, and Time In the
bottom left of this painting are several masks in a heap on the
ground, while in the top right is one of the title figures, who is
shaded more darkly than the other figures. On the right is an infant
holding up what appear to be pink flower petals in his hands, while
the center is dominated by the nude woman on her knees whose left
breast is covered by the winged figure embracing her. FTP, what is
this allegorical mannerist masterpiece depicting the four title
figures, painted by Agnolo Bronzino? Jean Racine After his appointment
as historiographer to the king, this author produced little, including
the play "Athalie", the four "Spiritual Hymns", and "Abrege de
l'historie de Port-Royal", inspired by his childhood, during which he
was raised as a Jansenist. After early works like "The Nymph of the
Seine", "The Thebaid", and "Alexander the Great", he produced his most
characteristic work, characterized by a single theme concerning a
strong spiritual conflict, such as "Bajazet", "Britannicus", and
"Berenice", the later two of which were intended to challenge his
older rival, Pierre Conreille (cor-NAY). FTP, who was this great 17th
century French playwright, author of "The Litigants" and "Phaedre"?
magnetic moment (or electromagnetic moment or magnetic area moment or
magnetic dipole moment) For an orbital electron this value is given by
q omega A over 2 pi, where q is the electronic charge, omega the
angular velocity, and A is the orbital area. Measured in SI units in
Ampere meters squared, the Kennelly version is calculated by T max
over the field strength H, while the Sommerfeld type is T max over B.
Defined as the maximum torque exerted on a magnet, current- carrying
coil, or moving charge in a magnetic field divided by the strength of
the field, FTP, what is this measure of the strength of a current-
carrying coil or magnet? David Ricardo Just before his retirement from
the stock market at age 42 this man addressed the issue of inflation
in his first tract, “The High Price of Bullion”. Remembered today as
much for his methods of analysis as for his conclusions, he developed
the theory of comparative cost and a theory of rent, and is best-known
for a work in which he used Malthus’ theory of population and the law
of diminishing returns to hold that at some point economic growth
would end. FTP, who was this author of 1817’s “The Principles of
Political Economy and Taxation”? Al(phonse) Capone As an engineer this
man compensated for the kick of the Thompson sub- machine gun. He
opposed the O'Banion's in the mid-twenties as a lieutenant to Johnny
Torrio, who he soon supplanted. Controlling the corrupt administration
of Major Bill Thompson, he reached the peak of his power with his
offensive against Bugs Moran's gang in the St. Valentine's Day
Massacre. FTP, who was this notorious Chicago mob boss known as
"scarface"? Charles Gounod Late in his career this composer returned
to religious works, composing the oratorios Redemption and Mors et
vita, written in the same simple style as his late operas Cinq Mars
and Polyeucte. Notorious during his life for his romantic affairs,
including one with Georgiana Weldon conducted while he lived with her
husband, this composer was convinced by the singer Pauline Viardot to
write his first opera, 1851's Sapho, which was followed by other
succeses like "Mireille" and "Romeo and Juliet". FTP, who was this
French composer best- known for the Funeral March of a Marionette and
the opera Faust? Carlsbad Decrees Their proposal was inspired mainly
by the murder of the dramatist August Kotzebue by Karl Sand, a member
of a radical student organization. Its measures included uniform
censorship of all periodicals by the Bund, disbanding the recently
formed nationalist student clubs, and establishment of an inquisition-
like central investigatory commission at Mainz to discover nationalist
conspiracies. Proposed by Metternich, they were agreed upon by a
meeting of ministers of major German states in the Bohemian spa town
for which they are named. FTP, what were these repressive 1819
decrees? Tirthankaras (prompt on "Ford-Maker" or "Jina") The names of
these beings are attributed to dreams by their mothers before their
births or to some other circumstance surrounding their entry into the
world. Each cosmic age produces the same number of them, the first of
whom are giants. Saviors who have succeeded in crossing over life's
stream of rebirths and have made a path for others to follow, the
first one of this age was Rsabhanatha, while the two most recent were
Parsvanatha and Mahavira. FTP, who are these 24 saviors of Jainism?
New Criticism Led by critics like Kenneth Burke, Yvor Winters, R.P.
Blackmur, and Cleanth Brooks, this American movement emphasized close
scrutiny of a literary text without regard to biographical, cultural,
or social considerations. It was given impetus by journals like The
Sewanee Review and The Kenyon Review. Erewhon, or, Over the Range A
satire of various aspects of British society, it was written by Samuel
Butler, and takes its name from an anagram for "nowhere". John MacLeod
The other half of the Nobel was awarded to this mentor of Banting in
whose lab Banting and Best worked. On vacation at the time of the
discovery, he had attached his name to Banting and Best's paper to get
it heard by the American Physiological Society. He subsequently split
his half with Collip, who characterized insulin after the discovery.
Quakers or the Society of Friends Premising their beliefs on the
concept of the "inner light", this religious group experienced one of
several splits in 1845 when John Wilbur's followers left the Orthodox
branch due to the reforms of Joseph Gurney. Their popular name was
supposedly given them by a Justice Bennett due to their typical
response to the word of God. The Master Builder In a subplot of this
drama Ragnar Brovik is unable to marry Kaia Fosli due to the
protagonist's unwillingness to let Ragnar establish himself. When
Hilda Wangel appears at the title figure's home, she discovers that he
believes he has defied God by choosing to have a family rather than
design churches. Hilda soon convinces him that he can free his
conscience by climbing to the top of the tower he has constructed on
his home, but he falls to his death instead. FTP, what is this drama
concerning Halvard Solness, written by Henrik Ibsen? Latent heat
(accept latent heat of fusion or vaporization) In thermodynamic terms
this value is equal to the change in internal energy plus the pressure
times the change in volume. First described and named by Joseph Black,
Black's student James Watt improved Newcomen's steam engine by
reducing its loss. Arising from the attractive forces of a substance's
molecules and the pressure of the atmosphere exerted on it, FTP, what
is this quantity of heat absorbed or released when a substance changes
phase at constant temperature, which comes in fusion and vaporization
varieties? The Luncheon on the Grass (or Dejeuner sur L'Herbe) In the
bottom left of this painting is an overturned fruit-basket atop
discarded clothing, while the bearded figure in the right foreground
can be seen holding a cane with his left hand and gesturing with his
right. In the background to the left of a rowboat is a woman washing
in a stream, but most noteworthy is Victorine Meurent, seen sitting
nude with her right arm propped up on her leg. FTP, what is this 1863
painting by Edouard Manet? Augustus or Octavian or Gaius Octavius This
ruler established the Consilium Principis as an advisory body and
created the Urban Cohort police system in Rome, as recorded in his
only surviving literary work, the autobiography Res Gestae, or
Monumentum Ancyranum. Early in his political career he strengthen his
position with his victory over Lucius Antony at Perugia and his
marriage to Scribonia, who he divorced in favor of Livia after she
bore him his only child, Julia Major. Gaining sole control of Rome
after Agrippa's victory at Actium, FTP, who was this first Roman
emperor? Atalanta One myth holds that this woman and her husband made
love in a temple dedicated to Cybele, after which Cybele turned them
into lions and yoked them to her chariot. Earlier, she had been
rewarded by Meleager with the pelt of a boar for drawing first blood
in a great boar hunt, but she is probably best- known for putting to
death any suitor who could not outrun her in a race. FTP, who was this
Calydonian hero finally defeated when her opponent dropped golden
apples which she was forced to recover during the race? The Great
American Novel This phrase was first used as the title of an 1868
essay by John De Forest, who cited “Uncle Tom’s Cabin” as the best
candidate for it. Homer Zigler is the hero of a 1938 novel with this
title in which its author, Clyde Brion Davis, tells of a
newspaperman’s failure to write one. The best-known literary work of
this name is probably the novel by Philip Roth describing the
fictitious Rupert Mundy’s baseball team. FTP, what is this 4-word
phrase which indicated the belief that it was possible to write a
national epic equal to the best works of other nations? Charles T.R.
Wilson During 1900-1910 this scientist studied electrical conduction
in dust-free air using a gold-leaf microscope of his own devising,
while earlier he had shown that nucleation of droplets can take place
in the absence of dust particles. These studies led him to construct a
device consisting of a vessel fitted with a piston and filled with gas
supersaturated with water vapor. When the piston is suddenly moved
outwards the vapor cools and a mist of tiny droplets forms on any
nuclei, dust, or ions presents, allowing them to be tracked. FTP, who
was this Scottish physicist, inventor of the cloud chamber? Value-
added tax Of the three major types identified, the “consumption”
version is most widely used, and is calculated almost exclusively
using the “invoice”, or “credit”, method. First adopted on a large
scale by France in 1954, it is now required to be implemented by
members of the European Union. According to the “invoice” method of
calculation, a seller of a good is required to pay the government the
difference in the taxes the seller has collected and the taxes already
paid on goods purchased. FTP, what is this government levy on the
amount that a business firm adds to the price of a commodity during
production and distribution of a good? Warren Hastings This leader led
the British in the Maratha War, deposed Chait Singh, zamindar of
Benares, and confiscated the lands and treasures of the Begum of Oudh.
These controversial actions led to a feud with Philip Francis, and
after a duel between the two Francis returned to England and accused
him of committing malpractices as governor general of Bengal. FTP, who
was this man acquitted after a celebrated 1788-95 trial in which he
was prosecuted by Edmund Burke? Stabat Mater One version was written
for women's voices by Pergolesi, and it is still sung today at the
Feast of the Seven Dolours. Famous versions have been composed by
Palestrina, Haydn, Schubert, Rossini, and Verdi, which were all based
on a 13th century religious poem probably written by the Franciscan
monk Jacopone da Todi. FTP, what are these musical works in honor of
Mary's vigil at the cross? Jack Burden This character is given to
periods of what he calls "the Great Sleep", in which he shuts his life
down and slumbers. Originally a directionless man who fails to marry
his love Anne Stanton and who can't complete his dissertation on his
great-uncle Cass Mastern, he soon abandons his wife Lois Seager
because he can't relate to her as more than just a sexual partner. His
life is changed by an encounter while working for the "Chronicle"
newspaper, leading him to became the hired hand of a demagogue who has
him discover blackmailing material to use against political enemies.
FTP, who is this narrator of "All the King's Men"? hash table Separate
chaining and linear probing are two popular methods for dealing with
this object's major problem, known as "collisions". Allowing for the
storage and retrieval of data in an average "big O" time of 1, it is
essentially an array equipped with a function which stores data in the
array at specific indices. FTP, what is this type of computer storage
"table"? Francis Herbert Bradley This thinker's 1876 work "Ethical
Studies" attacked contemporary moral philosophy, especially
utilitarianism, while "Principles of Logic" denied that the nature of
fact could ever be adequately expressed by any form of statement.
Strongly influenced by Kant and Hegel, he is best-known for arguing
that no unitary thing can be viewed as the collection of properties
attributable to it, holding that the character of any thing is given
by the relatedness of its parts. FTP, who was this English philosopher
who in "Appearance and Reality" founded the school of absolute
idealism? Caporetto At the close of this battle the losers were forced
back to the River Piave, where the French and British aided in
establishing a defensive line. The Austro-German forces of General
Belov captured 300,000 men while defeating the army of Luigi Cadorna,
leading to Cadorna's replacement by Armando Diaz. Notorious for the
disorganized retreat of the Italians, FTP, what was this 1917 battle
which broke the WWI stalemate in Italy? The Birth of a Nation In an
important moment of this film, Flora, played by Mae Marsh, jumps off a
cliff to avoid being raped by the former house slave Gus. After
depicting the effects of the Civil War on the Cameron and Stoneman
families, this film reaches its climax with the simultaneous rescues
of Elsie Stoneman, played by Lillian Gish, and the Cameron family, who
are saved from an assault by freed slaves and carpetbaggers by the Ku
Klux Klan, led by Ben Cameron. FTP, what was this first great movie
blockbuster, directed by D.W. Griffith? Sunni (or Sunnites) This
religious group is divided into four schools of equal standing, the
Shaflites, Malikites, Hanbalites, and Hanafites, while its reform and
purification is a major goal of the Wahabi movement. With a name
meaning "tradition", they consider the sayings and teachings of
Mohammed to be as authentic as the Koran, and they acknowledge the
first four caliphs as the rightful successors of Mohammed. FTP, what
is this branch comprising about 80% of Muslims, opposed to the
Shiites? the Monk's Tale Among the modern stories told in this tale
are accounts of Bernabo of Milan, Pedro of Spain, and Pedro of Cyprus.
Interrupted by the Knight in the prologue of the Nun's Priest's Tale,
the prologue sees the Host jokingly lament that the title figure
cannot take advantage of his virile looks. The title figure than goes
on to describe seventeen tragedies on the fall of famous men. FTP,
what is this Canterbury Tale told by a member of a religious order?
acetylcholine This substance is released by nerve endings of the
parasympathetic nervous system. Its function is to initiate muscular
contraction or to pass on a nerve impulse to the next nerve, but after
it has been released it has only a transitory effect because it is
repidly broken down by cholinesterase. FTP, what is this
neurotransmitter abbreviated ACh? {Carlsbad} Caverns One of its
features is the Papoose Room, whose roof is famous for its drapery-
like formations. Consisting of three major levels, the deepest of
which is over 1,000 feet deep, its Twin Domes and Giant Dome are
typical of its fantastic stalagmites, and are found in the "Big Room",
one of the largest underground chambers ever discovered. Formed when
limestone was dissolved by water, its 73 square mile area has yet to
be fully explored. Home to millions of bats, FTP, what is this system
of caverns in southeastern New Mexico? Fugitive Slave Laws (or Acts)
In one of the most famous attempts to circumvent these laws Boston
citizens tried and failed to break Anthony Burns out of prison, while
in another incident a group of Pennsylvania Quakers were tried but
acquitted for not acting in accordance with them. The first was upheld
in Prigg v. Pennsylvania and the second was upheld in Abelman v.
Booth, despite the fact that both denied fundamental Fifth and Sixth
Amendment guarantees for some citizens. The first, passed in 1793, was
largely ignored, but the second became notorious for such provisions
as guaranteeing different payments to judges depending on what verdict
they reached. FTP, what were these two laws intended to return runaway
slaves to their masters? South Sea Bubble This 18th century crisis
occurred after rampant speculation in the interests of the namesake
company which was originally founded to trade with South America, but
which agreed to take over 3/5 of the English national debt. When
confidence in the company collapsed, thousands of investors were
ruined. Central Dogma Lamarck's original theory of evolution based on
acquired characteristics was found to violate this basic doctrine
originally held by geneticists, which claimed that flow of genetic
material could only occur from DNA to RNA. They were wrong, and Roger
Bhan should kick their asses for it. Jean-Bernard-Leon Foucault In
addition to finding the speed of light within 1 percent of its true
value in 1850, he also showed that light travels slower through water
than air and discovered the existence of eddy currents in a copper
disk moving through a strong magnetic field, but he is best known for
his device with proved that the earth rotates on its axis. symbolic
interactionism Coined by Herbert Blumer in 1937, this school of
sociology holds that meanings do not derive from the mind, but rather
have their source in communication with other humans, and that the
self arises from internalizing the attitudes of others. Major thinkers
in the field include Charles Cooley and Howard Becker. Juno and the
Paycock Mary, the daughter of the central family, rejects Gerry Devine
for Charley Bentham, only to see Bentham flee to England, leaving Mary
pregnant. While the “Captain” and Joxer Daly lead dissipated lives,
the son, Johnny, is shot by the IRA for betraying a neighbor’s son.
All the while, the family is held together solely by the mother, the
Boyle family’s only provider. Set during the Irish Civil War, FTP,
what is this Sean O’Casey play about Juno Boyle? rubisco (accept early
answer of ribulose biphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase) In
photosynthetic bacteria they usually consist of two protein chains,
while plants and algae build large ones consisting of 16 protein
chains. Extremely slow working and prone to bind to oxygen molecules
by mistake, they work by taking carbon dioxide and producing two
phosphoglycerate chains, and while five-sixth of the product is used
to make more of this enzyme, the rest produces sucrose that is stored
as starch. The most abundant enzyme on earth, FTP, what is this plant
enzyme whose name is a contraction of ribulose biphosphate
carboxylase/oxygenase? Brandenburg Concerto #2 in F major In the first
and third movements of this musical work the trumpet is used for
brilliant virtuoso effect, especially in its highest registers.
Written in F major, its most famous section is the lyrical second
section, in which the spare accompaniment of cellos and cembalo
support three of the solo instruments, the flute, oboe, and violin.
Like its five famous partners it was composed in the Italian concerto
grosso style, and is named for a margrave who collected concerto
music. FTP, what is this J.S. Bach concerto? Boston Massacre The
prosecution of the perpetrators of this event was conducted by Robert
Treat Paine, while the defense was conducted in part by Josiah Quincy.
It occurred around 9:00 pm when Captain Thomas Preston and seven of
his men arrived to aid a British customs-house guard who was being
harassed by colonists, and after a soldier was hit by a chunk of ice
he fired into the crowd, prompting his fellow soldiers to also fire.
Resulting in the deaths of 5 colonists, including Crispus Attucks,
FTP, what was this 1770 massacre? gestalt A method of therapy
associated with this school of psychology was developed after WWII by
Frederick Perls. Its name was coined in 1890 by the philosopher
Christian von Ehrenfels, but it did not truly develop as a school of
thought until over two decades later, due in part to studies of
problem solving among apes of the Canary Islands conducted by Wolfgang
Kohler. Emphasizing the importance of considering the whole of a
psychological issue rather than its individual parts, FTP, what is
this school of psychology most associated with the phi phenomenon and
the work of Max Wertheimer? Rupert Brooke This author of the play
“Lithuania” is chiefly valued today for works like the poem “The Old
Vicarage, Grandchester”, his Tahiti poems, including “Tiara Tahiti”,
and his final fragment, “I strayed about the deck”. Known for his
remarkable beauty and charm, after serving as leader of the Cambridge
literary world he gained renown for his collection “Poems 1911”, but
his fame truly exploded with the poem “The Soldier”, which was one of
his five “War Sonnets”. However, his career was cut short when he died
of blood-poisoning while on his way to fight in the Dardanelles. FTP,
who was this British war poet best known for the collection “1914 and
Other Poems”? Heraclitus of Ephesus This presocratic philisopher
postulated fire as the basic matter of the universe, and claimed that
the fire of virtuous human souls would eventually join the cosmic
fire. Known for the extreme difficulty of his writings, this
philosopher known as "the riddler" and "the obscure" held that all
things are in dynamic equilibrium and that apparent opposites are
bound by an underlying connection, with all things a manifestation of
logos. Known in later times as the "weeping philosopher", FTP, who was
this native of Ephesus who Plato claimed had argued that all things
are in constant flux? Celebes or Sulawesi Mt. Rantekombola is the
highest peak on this island which is home to the lakes of Towuti and
Tondano, the latter of which is famous for its waterfall. Extremely
irregular in shape, its northernmost peninsula forms the Tomini gulf,
while its three other peninsulas form the gulfs of Tolo and Bone in
the south. Ujung Pandang is its chief city and port, and lies on the
Makassar Strait, which separates it from Borneo. FTP, what is this
Indonesian island separated from the Philippines by the Sea of the
same name? Little Women, or Meg Jo, Beth, and Amy The heroine of this
novel marries the old German professor Dr. Bhaer, while her older
sister marries the young tutor John Brooke and in a future novel gives
birth to twins, Daisy and Demi. After failing to marry the heroine,
next door neighbor Theodore Lawrance marries the artistic youngest
sister Amy, while the sickly Beth dies young. Centering on the
literary tomboy Jo March, FTP, what is this novel by Louisa May
Alcott? Huldrych Zwingli This religious thinker's main work was "The
True and False Religions". His first major post was pastor at Glarus,
and he served as chaplain to the troops of Glarus in the battles of
Novara and Marignano, but would later be killed at Kappel serving in
the same capacity. Although he disagreed with other reformers on some
doctrinal points, as seen in his failure to reconcile with Luther at
the Marburg conference, he established the Reformation in his country
with his 67 Articles. FTP, who was this Swiss religious reformer?
Stark effect The name of this effect is also used with Einstein's name
to describe a law stating that in a photochemical process one photon
is absorbed by each molecule causing the process. Discovered in 1913,
this effect was the first whose explanation saw perturbation theory
applied to quantum mechanics, and held that this effect could be
described by regarding the electric field involved as a perturbation
on the quantum states and energy levels of an atom in the absence of
an electric field. FTP, what is this splitting of the lines in the
spectra of atoms due to the presence of a strong electric field, an
analogue of the Zeeman effect? Internationals (accept International
Working Men's Associations) The least important was the fourth one,
formed in Perigny, France in 1938, which dissolved due to the
bickering of its eventual leaders Pablo and Germain. The Third caused
a split in various world parties due to its insistence on acceptance
of the "Twenty-One Points of pure doctrine". Known as the Comintern,
it succeeded the successful second, or Socialist, one, but the most
famous was the first, formed in London in 1864, which soon dissolved
due to conflict between Marx and the anarchists. FTP, what were these
associations formed to unite socialist and communists organizations
throughout the world? Robert Smithson Originally a Minimalist artist,
this artist expounded on his use of mirrors and mathematical
impersonality in a November 1966 article in Arts magazine. Killed in a
Texas plane crash while surveying a site for one of his pieces, works
like "Partially Buried Woodshed" and "Asphalt Rundown" reflected his
mature style, in which he used materials collected from abandoned
quarries and old mine trailings to construct his trademark "non-
sites". FTP, who was this artist best-known for an earthwork adjacent
to the Great Salt Lake entitled "Spiral Jetty"? Essays of Montaigne
(or Essais) Sections of this work include "That the Taste for Good and
Evil Depends in Good Part upon the Opinion We Have of Them", "The
Education of Children", "On Judging the Death of Another", and "To
Philosophize is to Learn to Die". Divided into three loosely organized
books in which the author rambles from one subject to another, this
work uses events from the author's life to depict what he called his
"self-portrait", while at the same time attacking the tenets of the
Enlightenment, most famously in its longest section, a defense of the
book "Theologia naturalis" entitled "Apologie de Raimond Sabond". FTP,
what is this 16th century opus, the masterpiece of Michel de
Montaigne? Milvian Bridge It was built in 109 BC as part of the
Flaminian Way by Marcus Aemilius Scaurus to span the Tiber near Rome.
It is famous for an event recounted by Lactantius and Eusebius, who
tell of the defeat of Maxentius and establishment of the winner as
sole Roman emperor. FTP, what was this site of a 312 AD military
victory at which Constantine saw a cross in the sky, leading to his
conversion to Christianity? steroids Members of this class of
compounds are characterized by a four-carbon cyclo-pentan-oper-hydro-
phenan-threne ring system. In humans, these lipids are secreted by the
ovaries and testes, the placenta, and the adrenal cortex, and include
several varieties of Vitamin D, bile acids, digitalis, estrogen,
progesterone, and testasterone. FTP, what are these compounds whose
anabolic variety are often abused by weightlighters? Kama This god's
epithet "amanga" comes from a myth in which he was burned to ashes by
Siva for having angered him. Represented as an ageless and unageing
youth riding a parrot and armed with a bow and arrows strung with
flowers, he was originally the demonic spirit which animated
Prajapati, while a later myth claims he burst from the heart of
Brahma. His consort is Rati, goddess of voluptousness. FTP, what is
this Indian god of love, best known for the sutra bearing his name?
Paterson The philosophy behind this poem is seen in the line "there
are no ideas but in things". Incorporating prose passages from
historical documents, newspapers, and geological surveys, it consists
of 5 complete Books and fragments of a sixth Book. Book 5 is untitled
but dedicated to Toulouse- Lautrec, and is a commentary by an aged
poet on the earlier four Books, which are entitled "The Delineaments
of the Giants", "Sunday in the Park", "The Library", and "The Run to
the Sea" and which concern a city on the Passaic River near the
author's hometown. FTP, what is this poem which holds that "a man in
himself is a city", written by William Carlos Williams? Diogenes of
Sinope The most famous cynic was this thinker from Sinope who was
known as "the dog" for his shamelessness and extreme poverty.
Believing that happiness was attained by satisfying only natural needs
in as simple a way as possible, he is said to have lived in a tub and
searched for an honest man using a lantern in the daylight. cabala
Hebrew for "tradition", this esoteric Jewish mystical system is based
on an oral tradition supposedly passed down from Abraham. Dealing with
the manifestations of God and his revelation, its chief books are the
Sefer Yezirah, or Book of Creation, and the Sefer HaZohar, or Book of
Splendor. Les Demoiselles d'Avignon (or The Young Women of Avignon)
Named by the artist's friend Andre Salmon, grapes and other pieces of
fruit can be seen in the front center of this painting, while another
notable feature are the stripes extending below the noses of the two
women on the right. A hand can be seen protruding above the head of
the woman on the left, and curtains partially obscure the nudity of
all five women, who are seen standing in the brothel where they work.
FTP, what is this landmark 1907 painting by Pablo Picasso? Philip II
of Macedon This leader gained the support of Thessaly by promising to
settle the Third Sacred War, and soon afterward defeated Phocis at the
Battle of the Crocus Field, thus securing his northern border. Having
established himself with his earlier victory at Amphipolis, he came to
terms with Greece in the Peace of Philocrates, but Athenian hostility
led by Demosthenes led him to crush the Greeks at Chaeronea in 338
BCE. Murdered while preparing a war on Persia, FTP, who was this king
of Macedon, the father of Alexander the Great? Robinson Crusoe In one
of his early adventures, this character and the young Moorish boy Xury
escape from slavery with the help of a Portuguese ship captain, who
helps him set up an estate in Brazil. After the novel's main plot
development, he is at first despondent, but soon builds tools,
domesticates sheep, grows corn and barley, and rediscovers his
Protestant faith with a Bible he saved from his former ship.
Eventually, he stops a mutiny on an English ship with his companion
Man Friday and returns home. FTP, who is the shipwrecked sailor
described in a novel by Daniel Defoe? The World as Will and Idea or
The World as Will and Represtentation Volumes 2 and 3 of this work
serve as supplements to the first volume, which is divided into four
books. Book 2 contains the author’s so-called “great extension” of his
major premise to all phenomena, Book 3 contains his theories of art,
and Book 4 explores the implications of will-less perception. More
famous is the Volume 2 essay criticizing aspects of Kant’s philosophy,
while the main premise holds that Kant’s “thing-in-itself” is in fact
the will. FTP, what is this philosophical work, the masterpiece of
Arthur Schopenhauer? Newfoundland Towns in this region include Come-
by-chance, Conception Bay, and Dildo West. Its indigineous people, the
Beothuk, died out in the 19th century. To its southeast is the French
overseas department of St. Pierre and Miquelon. Economically important
are Churchill Falls and Voisey's Bay, while its important cities
include Corner Brook and Mount Pearl, the latter of which is a suburb
of its capital, St. John's. FTP, what is this Canadian province
consisting of Labrador and the namesake island? rotten boroughs The
most notorious ones include Old Sarum and Dunwich, the latter of which
had mostly been submerged under the North Sea. There were more than 50
of them by 1832, the year they were abolished by the Reform Act.
Entitled to elect two Members of Parliament despite an almost
nonexistent population, FTP, what were these British Parliamentary
boroughs? Raman effect or scattering This effect can be subclassified
into two versions, Stokes and anti- Stokes, and only became useful
with the development of lasers, when the characteristic spectrum of
monochromatic light produced when a laser is directed at a substance
could be analyzed to determine such things as molecular structure.
Only 1/1000 as strong as Rayleigh scattering in liquids, in this
effect light suffers both a change in phase and change in frequency
when passing through a material medium. FTP, what is this effect
discovered in 1928 by the Indian scientist for which it is named? The
Prose Edda or Younger Edda The third section is entitled Poetic
Diction, and enumerates and explains the special vocabulary used
throughout, while the final section, A Counting of Meters, is a
technical analysis of metrical schemes. Beginning with a description
of the creation of the world and of pagan poetry, its core is the
second section, The Beguiling of Gylfi, which contains stories about
the Norse gods. Written in the 13th century, what is this Icelandic
collection of mythology written by Snorri Sturluson? (Karl) Gunnar
Myrdal The economist served as executive secretary of the UN Economic
Commission for Europe, and anticipated many of the ideas of Keynes in
works like "The Political Element in the Development of Economic
Theory" and "Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions". Deeply
committed to social justice and eradication of poverty, he became a
leading analyst of third world development, resulting in the work
"Asian Drama", but he is best-known for a book whose subtitle claims
examines "The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy". FTP, who was
Swedish co-winner of the 1974 Nobel Prize in Economics, author of "An
American Dilemma"? kwanzaa It is dedicated to the principles of unity,
self-determination, collective responsibility, cooperative economics,
purpose, creativity, and faith. On the sixth day community members
gather for the karamu feast, while on each night one of the candles of
the seven-branched kinara candleabra is lit. With a name meaning
"first fruits", it begins on December 26, and was invented by Maulana
Karenga. FTP, what is this African-American holiday? osmium This
metallic element is largely used for the production of hard alloys for
use in fountain pen points, phonograph needles, and instrument
bearings. Recovered commercially as the byproduct of the refining of
nickel ores mined near Sudbury, Ontario, it often forms a highly toxic
tetraoxide whose pungent smell gives it its name. It is found in group
VIII of the periodic table, where it immediately precedes iridium, and
it is slightly more dense than iridium, making it the densest metal.
FTP, what is this element with atomic number 76 and symbol Os?
Stymphalian birds There were supposedly 30 of these creatures whose
limbs were armed with metallic tips, and they infested the woods
around a namesake lake in Arcadia. Dangerous flesh-eating monsters,
they were finally scared out of the woods by a huge rattle and killed.
FTP, what were these birds of Greek myth, the subject of Heracles'
sixth labor? Kazuo Ishiguro This author first gained recognition for
three short stories published in the anthology Intorduction 7, while
his first novel, telling of Etsuko's reaction to her daughter Keiko's
suicide, is entitled A Pale View of Hills. The artist Masuji Ono is
the subject of An Artist of the Floating World, while 1995's The
Unconsoled served as the follow up to his best-known novel, which
describes Stevens the butler. FTP, who is this Japanese-born writer
who won the Booker Prize for The Remains of the Day? John Ruskin This
man believed that the greatest artworks were the ones that conveyed
"to the mind of the spectator the greatest number of the greatest
ideas", and went on to classify these great ideas in the categories of
Power, Imagination, Truth, Beauty, and Relation. He developed his
philosophy of art in works like Val d'Arno, The Eagle's Nest, Aratra
Pentelici, and The Bible of Amiens. FTP, who is this 19th century art
critic, author of The Stones of Venice? (Christian) Felix Klein This
mathematician collaborated with Sophus Lie on the discovery of the
fundamental properties of asymptotes of the Kummer surface, and with
Arnold Sommerfeld wrote a four volume work on the workings of
gyroscopes. Namesake of the only non-cyclic four-element group, he
founded and supervised the "Encyclopedia of Mathematical Knowledge",
and is known for his "Erlangen Program", which synthesized geometry.
FTP, who was this German mathematician, namesake of a famous one sided
surface known as his bottle? First Crusade This military endeavor was
distinguished from others of its type by the presence of Adhemar of Le
Puy as Papal Legate, and saw a new Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem
established under Godfrey of Bouillon. After the failure of an ill-
fated "People's Crusade" led by Walter Sansavoir and Peter the Hermit,
the main campaign led to the establishment of a foothold at Antioch
after a victory over the Turks at Dorylaeum. Organized in response to
a request for assistance against the Seljuk Turks by Alexius I
Comnenus, FTP, what was this Crusade proclaimed by Urban II in 1095?
Cold Mountain In this novel, one of the characters struggles to keep
her father's farm running with the aid of an intrepid drifter named
Ruby. Based on the author's family history and stories handed down by
his great-great-grandfather, it parallels the spiritual awakening of
Ada with the physical journey experienced by Inman, a wounded
Confederate soldier who leaves the hospital to return to Ada. FTP,
what is this recent novel by Charles Frazier? Ariadne auf Naxos (or
Ariadne on Naxos) The most acclaimed moment in this opera is the aria
"Grossmachtige Prinzessin", which prompts Harlequin to make advances
on the singer. Its prologue concerns the anger of a serious opera
composer at plans to have his work performed at the same time as a
Commedia dell'Arte farce, and who is unconsoled despite the advances
of Zerbinetta. In the opera itself, the title figure agrees to
accompany Bacchus to Olympus after being abandoned by Theseus.
Intended to be presented after performances of "The Bourgeois
Gentleman", FTP, what is this opera by Richard Strauss? Joly's steam
calorimeter Named for its inventor, this calorimeter measures the
specific heat capacity of a gas at constant volume using two spherical
containers suspended from the opposite ends of a balance arm. One
sphere is evacuated, and the whole apparatus is enclosed in a steam
bath. The specific heat capacity is then calculated from the
difference between the masses of water then condenses on each sphere.
pseudo-Dionysus or Dionysus the pseudo-Aeropagite John Scotus Erigena
was also important for his influential translations of the works of
this 6th century mystical Syrian theologian whose extant works include
"Mystical Theology", "Celestial Hierarchy", and "Divine Names". His
name comes from being wrongly identified with a convert of St. Paul.
Theremin Other than the opera "The Eagle Revolt", Andrey Pashchenko's
only important musical work is his "Symphonic Mystery", which was
written for this instrument in which two loop antennas are attached to
two oscillators and a loudspeaker. Changes in pitch are caused by
moving the right hand in space, while left hand movements control
volume. Lucasta Various literary works describe this person in a
dialogue with Alexis, taking the waters at Tunbridge, weeping, and
paying her obsequies to the memory of the poet's cousin Mrs. Bowes
Barnes. In another work the poet observes that "though sea and lands
betwixt us both, ...Above the highest sphere we meet, ... and greet as
angels greet." In the most famous poem addressed to her, the poet
opens "Tell me not, sweet, I am unkind, that from ... thy chaste
breast and quiet mind to war and arms I fly", holding that "I could
not love thee, dear, so much, lov'd I not honor more." FTP, who is
this woman addressed before "Going Beyond the Seas" and "Going to the
Wars" by Richard Lovelace? iron The isotopes of this element have the
highest "packing fraction" of any element. Its pure version has three
crystal forms, alpha, gamma, and delta, with the alpha type exhibiting
ferromagnetism up to 768 degrees Celsius. Possessing nine isotopes
with mass numbers 52-60, it is the fourth most abundant element in the
earth's surface, and is found in the ores ilmenite, siderite, and
haematite. FTP, what is this metallic transition element with atomic
number 26 and symbol Fe? Nash equilibrium or Nash solution Like the
prisoner’s dilemma, this economic idea is based on the concept of
balanced threats, resulting in a somewhat limited applicability and
frequent results which seem less than fair. Using the assumption that
a game has a set of possible outcomes, each of which is associated
with a utility for each of two players, it provides a unique solution
which fulfills four requirements, that the solution fulfill Pareto
optimality, is symmetric, independent of irrelevant options, and
independent of the choice of utility function. FTP, what is this
equilibrium which won its developer a share of the 1994 Nobel Prize in
Economics? George I This man commanded the Imperial Hanoverian forces
during the Marlborough wars, and spent much of his life unmarried,
having divorced his wife and cousin, Dorothea of Zell, imprisoning her
in the castle of Ahlde. Elector of Hanover from 1692, he was the son
of Sophia, which allowed him to take power due to the Act of
Settlement, and despite his heavy German accent was a successful king,
consolidating Whig power with his support of Robert Walpole. FTP, who
was this king of England, the first of the House of Hanover? Rhenish
Symphony (accept early answer of Schumann's 3rd Symphony) This
symphony's second movement was derived from an old German song, the
third movement is a romanza, while the concluding fifth movement is a
musical setting of a festival in the title region. Written in E-flat
major, toward the end is quoted the theme of its most famous section,
the fourth movement, which was inspired by the Cathedral at Cologne
and consequently known as the "Cathedral Scene". Intended to depict
life on the title river, FTP, what is this symphony, the third by
Robert Schumann? Possession, A Romance The action of this novel is set
in motion when the protagonist finds two drafts of a letter in a copy
of Vico's Principi di una Scienza. Conjecturing that the letters were
intended for the poetess Christabel LaMotte, the literary investigator
Roland Mitchell is led to completely reevaluate his views on the 19th
century poet Randolph Henry Ash. Subtitled A Romance, FTP, what is
this novel, the best-known work of A.S. Byatt? Porifera Members of
this phylum filter food particles from water using choanocytes,
flagellated cells with cause water to flow in through openings in the
body wall called ostia and flow out through the oscula, openings at
the top. Their bodies are hollow, are supported by an internal
skeleton of spicules of chalk, silica, or fibrous protein, and consist
basically of aggregations of cells between which there is little
nervous coordination. FTP, what is this phylum comprising the sponges?
cargo cults Followers of these religious movements often worship the
figure John Frum. Common among the natives of New Guinea and
Melanesia, these movements greatly expanded after WWII when supplies
where abandoned in the area, and some have even built airstrips to
receive what the name of the movements promises. FTP, what are these
cults in which Asian natives ritualistically ape European customs they
don't understand to persuade supernatural powers to give them material
wealth? Chesapeake Capes or Virginia Capes The only ship lost in this
battle was the 64-gun Terrible, which had to be scuttled. While
attempting to intercept a supply convoy under Admiral de Barras, 19
British ships under Thomas Graves were driven from the namesake
location by the 24 French ships of Francois de Grasse. FTP, what was
this September 1781 naval battle which prevented Cornwallis from
escaping Yorktown by sea? John Ford (accept early answer of Sean
Aloysius O'Fienne) This director got his start making silent films,
his best effort in that genre being 1924's The Iron Horse. Later films
like The Lost Patrol, Young Mr. Lincoln, The Man Who Shot Liberty
Valence, and The Informer often depicted groups of characters
confronted with common dangers which revealed the strengths and
weaknesses of their characters. Originally named Sean Aloysius
O'Fienne, FTP, who is this American film director of The Quiet Man,
How Green Was My Valley, The Grapes of Wrath, and Stagecoach? Sextus
Propertius This author once claimed to be the "Roman Callimachus",
supporting his claim with a series of poems written in the baroque
Alexandrian manner found in "Book IV" of his works. In "Book II" he
contemplated writing an epic poem to address concerns that he could
write of nothing but love, concerns which stemmed from his first
collection of works, the "Monobiblos", which contain many of the poems
addressed to his mistress, Cynthia. FTP, who was this greatest elegiac
poet of ancient Rome, best-known today for a poem in "homage" to him
by Ezra Pound? Rio de la Plata (or Plate River) This river was
discovered in 1516 by Juan Ruiz de Solis, and explored by Magellan
four years later, and while it is known for its large numbers of
sandbanks and shoals, constant dredging allows it to be navigable by
large vessels. As the focal point of the second largest water system
of its continent, it receives a tremendous volume of water from the
Purana and Uruguay rivers, flowing 170 miles to the Atlantic. FTP,
what is this estuary lying between Uruguay and Argentina? Oakes Ames
This man's identically named grandson was a famous botanist and orchid
expert who pioneered the field of economic botany and authored
Economic Annuals and Human Cultures. Early in his life this man joined
his brother Oliver in managing his family's well-known shovel factory
in his native Easton, Massachusetts. Active in the founding of the
Republican Party in Massachusetts, he served in the US House of
Representatives from 1863-73, but is best-known today for the events
set in motion when he ousted Thomas Durant as the head of a company
which soon bribed political figures like James Brooks, James
Patterson, and Schulyer Colfax. FTP, who was this mastermind behind
the Credit Mobilier Scandal? Vladimir Tatlin During his early years
this artist combined painting with the life of a merchant seaman,
producing works like The Sailor, while a meeting with Picasso
influenced the creation of his Painted Reliefs and Corner Reliefs. His
artistic career reached its peak with his design for the Monument to
the Third International, but he is best-known for founding an art
movement dedicated to a purely abstract art that reflected modern
technology. FTP, who was this Russian, the founder of Constructivism?
The Dream Songs (accept 77 Dream Songs until numbers 147-157 are
mentioned, and accept His Toy, His Dream, His Rest until the mention
of the father's suicide) In many parts of this literary work, the
protagonist takes on the persona of the minstrel show performer Mr.
Bones and engages in wild conversations with his sidekick Tambo. It
begins by describing how the protagonist accidentally witnessed his
father's suicide, while later he loses his friend Bhain Campbell to
cancer. Numbers 147-157 concern the death of poet Delmore Schwartz,
the section entitled "Opus Posthumous" describes the death of the
protagonist, Henry, while the 385th and last song tells of his return
home to his daughter. FTP, what is this sequence of poems most famous
for its first 77 installments, written by John Berryman? phenomonology
Heidegger adopted this method in order to examine the data of
immediate experience, while Merleau-Ponty applied it to perception in
one of his major works. Inspired by the teachings of Franz Brentano,
it involves excluding, or "bracketing", all assumptions about the
external causes and consequences of one's own consciousness during a
scrupulous inspection of one's intellectual processes, which its
creator claimed would lead to an a priori investigation of the
meanings common to the thought of different minds. FTP, what is this
method of enquiry developed by Edmund Husserl? Electra Lesser known
women of Greek myth with this name include the wife of Thaumas and
mother of the Harpies, as well as one of the Pleiades who bore
Dardanos by Zeus. The most famous one was originally betrothed to
Castor, but was later married to a poor yeoman due to fears that any
son of hers might avenge her father’s death. Having sent her brother
to Strophius of Phocis to protect him, on his return they killed
Aegisthus and their mother Clytemnestra. FTP, who was this sister of
Orestes, the subject of plays by the three great Greek playwrights?
Ethiopia (prompt on Abyssinia) This empire's ruler Susenyos was
converted to Roman Catholicism in 1626, but he was soon forced to
abdicate by his son Fasilidas, who moved the capital to Gondar. It
grew from the city of Axum, and after its collapse the Zadwe Dynasty
emerged, only to be replaced in 1270 by the Solomonic dynasty,
bringing the Amharas to prominence. After centuries of choas, the
empire was reunited in 1855 by Tewodros II, and its independence was
defended at the Battle of Adowa by his son Menelik II. FTP, what is
this African country most famously headed by Haile Selassie? Gilbert
Lewis With Merle Randall, this chemist wrote "Thermodynamics and the
Free Energy of Chemical Substances", having earlier calculated the
free energies of 143 substances. The graduate adviser of Harold Urey,
he aided Urey in the discovery of heavy water, but is better-known for
his pioneering work on valency and his definition of a base as a
substance which supplies a pair of electrons for a chemical bond. FTP,
who was this American chemist best-known for his namesake dot
diagrams? The Satanic Verses It is the most famous and controversial
novel by Salman Rushdie. Claude Lorrain or Claude Gellee When he was
12 years old, this artist entered the household of Agostino Tossi as a
pastry-cook, soon becoming his assistant. The most celebrated exponent
of the "ideal landscape", this French artist compiled the Liber
Veritatis to protect against forgeries, while other famous works
include "Ascanius and the Stag", "The Expulsion of Hagar", and "The
Embarkation of the Queen of Sheba". Kallikak family The term moron was
coined in a study of this family, whose name was fictionalized. The
patriarch, Martin, had given rise to two family branches by getting it
on with both a feeble-minded girl and a normal girl. Among the 480
members of the latter line were found 143 feeble minded members, while
the latter consisted almost entirely of normal individuals. Songs
Without Words (Lieder ohne Worte) Among the ones named by the composer
himself are number 18, the Duetto, and number 23, the Volkslied.
Published in 8 groups of 6 during the period from 1830 to 1845, they
all abandon the contrasting middle section typical of character music
in favor of a simple uniform accompaniment with a singable melody, as
seen in examples like the Hunting Song, Spinning Song, Spring Song,
and the three Venetian Boating Songs. FTP, what is this collection of
48 unaccompanied piano works by Felix Mendelssohn? anthrax In humans
this disease occurs in several forms, with the intestinal form
resulting in inflammation of the intestinal tract, vomiting, and
severe diarrhea, while the pulmonary form, also called woolsorter's
disease, affects the lungs and is quickly fatal. Most commonly it is
seen as a cutaneous infection which produces malignant pustules on the
arms and neck. However, it is more famous as a disease affecting
herbivores which results in cardiac distress, trembling, convulsions,
and death, and which became notorious for causing widespread epidemics
throughout southern Europe during the 18th and 19th centuries. The
first human disease for which a microorganism was shown to be the
causative agent, FTP, what is this disease, the first for which an
effective bacterial vaccine was developed? To Build a Fire The unnamed
protagonist of this story is en route to a camp at an old mining claim
on the left fork of the Henderson, and has split from his friends and
associates to explore the possibility of procuring logs from some
nearby islands. The dog he is traveling with is uneasy to leave the
site where the protagonist stopped for lunch, but the protagonist
continues into the Klondike, but after accidentally falling through
some ice into a stream, he is unable to complete the title task, and
soon resigns himself to death. FTP, what is this short-story by Jack
London? Mackenzie river (accept Finley-Peace-Mackenzie) The Liard is
the largest tributary emptying directly into this river. At Lake
Athabasca it joins the Athabasca River and the Finley-Peace River
System to form the second longest continuous stream on the continent
at 2,600 miles long. Originating in the Great Slave Lake, it flows
generally northwest into the Arctic Ocean through a great delta. FTP,
what is this great rivet of the Northwest Territories of Canada? Paris
Commune (accept Communards) At the end of this uprising the
revolutionaries murdered their hostages, including the city's
archbishop. Sparked by a bungled attempt to disarm the National Guard,
it began with the election of a 92 member government to oppose Louis
Thiers, who was forced to briefly retreat to Versailles before Marie
MacMahon brutally recaptured the city. FTP, what was this March-May
1871 French uprising that followed France's humiliating defeat in the
Franco- Prussian War? Paul Tillich Lesser known works by this thinker
include "Love, Power and Justice", "Biblical Religion and the Search
for Ultimate Reality", and "My Search for Absolutes". Forced to flee
Germany by the Nazis, he was invited to America by Reinhold Niebuhr,
where he taught at the Union Theological Seminary, and later Harvard
and Chicago. His thought was a mixture of existentialism, depth
psychology, and neo-scholastic ontology, and although he was often
attacked as an atheist who disguised his lack of faith with complex
language, he argued that the basis of theology was man's estrangement
from the divine. FTP, who was this German best known for his three
volume opus "Systematic Theology"? Diels-Alder reaction For this
reaction to occur, the compound to be added to must possess a double
bond with a carbonyl group on each side, as in an alkene, which is
converted to a cyclohexene. Discovered in 1928, it results in the
formation of a ring structure, and occurs when a compound containing
two double bonds separated by a single bond adds to a suitable
compound. FTP, what is this reaction involving conjugated dienes named
for its two German discoverers, the winners of the 1950 Nobel Prize in
Chemistry? William Rose Benet Author of the verse novel Rip Tide, this
man was one of the founders of the Saturday Review, and wrote its
column "The Phoenix Nest". Married for a time to the poet Elinor
Wylie, he was an enthusiastic and prolific poet responsible for the
collections The Spirit of the Scene, The Stairway of Surprise, Starry
Harness, and Merchants from Cathay, and he won a Pulitzer Prize for
his verse autobiography The Dust Which Is God. FTP, who was this
brother of another famous poet best-known for editing The Reader's
Encyclopedia? Myers-Briggs Type Indicator This test was born when its
developer noted that her husband Clarence was much different than
other members of her family. Now owned by Consulting Psychologists
Press, Incorporated, its creator learned test construction at a local
bank and soon gave her test to thousands of Pennsylvania
schoolchildren, eventually becoming convinced that anyone can be
placed into one of 16 personality types based on four scales:
sensate/intuitive, thinking/feeling, judging/perceiving, and
extraversion/introversion. Named both for its developer and the mother
who introduced her to Jung's Psychological Types, FTP, what is this
popular personality type indicator? Georges Danton This leader was
forced to leave France briefly in 1791, but returned to become
Minister of Justice. His calmness and authority during the crises of
1792, including his famous call for "more daring", cemented his
importance to the Revolution. Founder of the militant Cordelier Club,
starting in April 1793 he effectively led the government as a member
of the Committee of Public Safety. FTP, who was this eloquent
revolutionary whose power was eclipsed by that of Robespierre, leading
to his 1794 execution? the Armory Show (or International Exposition of
Modern Art) It was mainly the product of the efforts of Arthur Davies,
president of the Association of American Painters and Sculptors.
Eventually moved to the Chicago Art Institute and Boston's Copley
Hall, it consisted of approximately 1600 works, and was in effect two
expositions, one presenting a cross-section of contemporary American
art, the other a controversial survey of modern European art which is
often cited as the beginning of American interest in progressive art.
FTP, what was this seminal 1913 art "show" named for the building in
which it was housed? Gaia hypothesis This theory is based on an idea
put forward by the British scientist James Ephraim Lovelock, and has
found favor with many conservationists. It proposes that the responses
of living organisms to environmental conditions ultimately bring about
changes that make the earth better adapted to support life, and that
the system would rid itself of any species that adversely affects the
environment. FTP, what is this hypothesis which holds that the whole
earth functions as a single self-regulating system, named for the
Greek earth goddess? Sor Juana Ines de la Cruz (or Juana Ramirez de
Asbaje) While a teenager this writer was tested by forty professors in
all areas of knowledge, and overwhelmed them at every point, gaining a
position with the viceroy. Author of the poetry collections "Flood
From the Muses' Springs" and "Fame and Posthumous Works of the Mexican
Phoenix and Tenth Muse", as a nun this writer became a symbol of
intellectual freedom with the "Reply to Sister Philotea", while her
best-known poem is Foolish Men Who Accuse. Championed in an Octovia
Paz study which discussed "the traps of faith", FTP, who was this 17th
century Mexican poet, frequently described as "the first American
feminist". Imhotep This historical figure was depicted with a cropped
or shaven head, seated with a roll of papyrus on his lap, and was
thought to have been the son of Ptah and Khredu-ankh. Likely
responsible for the first temple at Edfu and the first pyramid, the
so-called Step Pyramid at Saqqara, he was an architect, astrologer,
and chief adviser to King Zoser, but later he became the patron of
craftsmen and identified with Asclepius in his role as a physician.
FTP, who was this Egyptian figure, one of the few mortals to achieve a
sort of sainthood? John Knox Early in his religious career this man
fell under the influence of George Wishart, and soon his association
with the assassins of Cardinal Beaton led to nineteen months of forced
labor. In 1551 he became chaplain to Edward VI, but he fled England
after the ascension of Mary and soon published his "First Blast of the
Trumpet against the Monstrous Regiment of Women", which briefly
alienated him from Elizabeth I, who nonetheless allowed him to return
to Scotland to lead the Protestants. FTP, who is this founder of
Scottish Presbyterianism? Gordius This farmer visited the people of
Telmissus to learn the significance of an eagle who had appeared
before him, and soon married the girl who told him to sacrifice to
Zeus. Shortly after fathering Midas, he was seen by the Phrygians
driving a simple cart, fulfilling an oracle stating that their next
king would arrive in that manner. In gratitude for his good fortune he
dedicated his cart to Zeus and fastened it to its yoke with a curious
knot. FTP, who was this king famous for the legend that whoever could
undo the knot would rule all of Asia? newspeak In this language the
same words serve as nouns and verbs, while adjectives are formed by
adding the suffix "ful" and adverbs are formed by adding the suffix
"-wise". The only known language whose vocabulary decreases in size
over time, it has no irregular verbs, and words expressing unorthodox
ideas have been eliminated in order to "diminish the range of thought"
of its speakers. FTP, what is this language preferred by Big Brother
in "1984"? Sugar Act Among the provisions of this act which angered
colonists were its categorization of hides, iron, and lumber as
"enumerated goods", its tax placed on wine imported from Portugal's
Atlantic islands, which had previously been duty-free, and its
provision placing all colonial smuggling cases under the jurisdiction
of a new Admiralty Court in Halifax at which defendants were required
to prove their innocence without a jury trial. The only act to produce
a significant colonial revenue for England, this 1764 act's main
provision actually reduced a previous tariff in the hopes of passing
on the tax to consumers. FTP, what was this act which cut in half
import duties on non-British molasses? Frank Gehry Known for his use
of jutting shapes juxtaposed with geometric forms, often constructed
using unusual materials like aluminum and raw plywood, his important
works include the Loyola Law School, Walt Disney Concert Hall, the
Experience Music Project rock museum, and the Guggenheim, Bilbao. heap
sort This method converts an array of data into a partially ordered
binary tree in which every node is greater than or equal to each of
its two children. Then it sorts the data in reverse by repeatedly
placing the largest unsorted element in its correct place. The data
structure it uses gives it its name. insertion sort This method scans
the list from the beginning until it finds the first element out of
order with respect to those that have come before. Then that element
is removed from the list, all previous elements larger than the one
removed are shifted one spot, and the out of place element is returned
to the list in the correct spot, after which the process begins again.
Arundhati Roy Her best-known work is "The God of Small Things". The
Way of the World This play is enlivened by the foolish antics of Sir
Wilfull Witwoud, while much of the action is driven by the tattling of
Mrs. Marwood, who reveals that the protagonist once had an intrigue
with Mrs. Fainall. Meanwhile, a complicated scheme is put in motion in
which the protagonist's servant Waitwell disguises himself as Sir
Rowland in order to make love to Lady Wishfort and marry Wishfort's
woman Foible, all in the hopes of forcing Lady Wishfort to approve of
the marriage of Millamant and Mirabell. FTP, what is this 1700 comedy,
often cited as the best work of William Congreve? Paul Cezanne This
artist once refused to shake hands with Manet because he claimed he
had not washed for days and did not want to dirty him. Early works
emphasizing violence like "The Murder" soon gave way to repeated
studies of favorite themes like his mistress and future wife Hortense
Fiquet and his estate Jas de Bouffan in Aix en Provence, in which he
used an emphasis on mass to convey three dimensions. FTP, who is this
post-impressionist known for his still lifes and landscapes of Monte
Ste-Victoire? naphthalene Auguste Laurent's studies of this compound
and its chlorination products led him to develop the first modern
theory of structural chemistry. Its molecular structure is that of two
benzene rings fused together with two adjacent carbon atoms common to
both rings. Obtained from coal tar, it is found in mothballs and gives
them their characteristic odor. FTP, what is this compound whose
formula of C10 H8 makes it the simplest polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbon? koan The most important collections of them are the
"Blue-Cliff Records" and the "Gateless Gate". With a name meaning
"public question", they originated during the formative period of
Ch'an in China, and it remains one of the main practices of Renzai.
They were used by masters to test their students' enlightenment
through their expressions of spiritual intuition in paradoxical
language. "What is the sound of one hand clapping" is a major example
of, FTP, what statements used in Zen Buddhism? Robert Morris After
unsound land speculation ruined this man, the first Bankruptcy Act was
enacted to secure his release from debtor's prison. Brought to
Philadelphia from England in 1747, by 1754 he partnered with Willing
to form one of Philadelphia's largest trading firms. He sat as a
Pennsylvania Senator from 1789-95, but is more important for earlier
actions, such as leading the organization of the first national
commercial bank in the United States and serving as Secretary of
Finance from 1781-83, when he dramatically improved funding for the
war effort by tapping into his own fortune. FTP, who was this man
known as the "financier of the Revolution"? The Country of the Pointed
Firs It ends with the tale of the forty-year courtship of William and
Esther Hight, while earlier the narrator traveled to Green Island,
where she met Mrs. Blachett and her bashful son William. Other tales,
concerning people like Cousin Joanna, Mr. Tilley, and Captain
Littlepage, are recounted by the narrator, who learns them while
spending the summer as the boarder of Almira Todd. Set in the isolated
Maine fishing village Dunnet Landing, FTP, what is this local color
masterpiece by Sara Orne Jewett? Rorschach test (prompt on ink blot
test) The "W compulsion" is a measure of the tendency to use all
available information in this diagnostic tool, which was modified by
Ewald Bohm and codified by John Exner. Growing from its inventor's
observations of children playing a game called Klecksographie, the
first results using it were collected in the 1921 monograph
"Psychodiagnostik", and contained various patient's analysis of the
color, shading, shape, and location of images on ten cards. FTP, what
is this famous psychological test popularly known as the "ink blot"
test? cross product This mathematical operation obeys a version of the
right hand rule and is anticommutative in that switching the order of
the vectors gives negative the original result. The magnitude of the
result equals the product of the magnitude of the original two vectors
times the sin of the angle between them, implying that the result will
be zero if applied to two parallel vectors. Resulting in a vector
perpendicular to both original vectors, FTP, what is this product of
three dimensional vectors notationally represented by an x? Levellers
(do not accept True Levellers) This group's meetings with English Army
Grandees became known as the Putney Debates. In documents like
Agreement of the People they expounded their advocacy of manhood
suffrage, sovereignty for the people, and abolition of the monarchy
and House of Lords, and were led by John Wildman, William Walwyn, and
John Lilburne in mutinies during the years 1647 and 1649, but by May
1649 the movement had been stymied. FTP, what was this English reform
group who were less radical than the Diggers? Vesuvius Its lower
slopes are covered with vineyards which produce the famous Lachryma
Christi wine. Its second summit, Mount Somma, is a ridge that half-
encircles the cone, and is separated from it by the Valley of the
Giants. Its height of approximately 4,000 feet changes with each of
the eruptions that marks it as the only active volcano on the European
mainland. Overlooking the Bay of Naples, FTP, what is this volcano
best-known for a 79 AD eruption? The Bostonians At the end of this
novel, the failure of the female protagonist is signaled when she must
replace her protege at a speaking engagement which her protege has
abandoned. The male protagonist briefly considers marriage to the
wealthy Mrs. Luna to escape financial difficulties, but soon realizes
his love for a young, impressionable feminist. Basil eventually wins
Verena Tarrent, who abandons her mentor, Olive Chancellor. Notable as
one of the first American treatments of a lesbian theme, FTP, what is
this 1886 novel named for the New England city in which it is set and
written by Henry James? Jan Oort This astronomer's constants are two
parameters to describe the major features of our Galaxy's differential
rotation in the Sun's neighborhood, and he proposed that the Galaxy
had missing mass. His establishment of the radio observatories at
Dwingeloo and Westerbork put the Netherlands at the forefront of
radioastronomy, in 1927 he calculated the mass and size of the Milky
Way and the Sun's distance from its center, and in the 1950s led the
team that mapped the spiral structure of the Milky Way, but is best-
known for a proposal based on the observation of the highly elliptical
orbits of comets. FTP, who was this Dutct astronomer for whom a
hypothetical Cloud of comets is named? George S Patton Aide-de-camp to
Pershing in Mexico and Europe, he was the first man detailed to the US
Army tank corps. As military governor of Bavaria after WWII he was
criticized for leniency to Nazis and removed. Earlier, he had led the
Allied landings in Casablanca and Sicily, but soon gained notoriety
for slapping a shell-shocked soldier. However, he was soon given
command of the 3rd Army early in 1944 and swept through Europe from
Normandy to Czechoslavakia. Known as "Old Blood and Guts", FTP, who
was this military genius killed in a car accident, memorably portrayed
on film by George C. Scott? Ma Vlast or My Fatherland or My Country
(accept reasonable equivalents) This work's third section, Sarka,
describes a legendary Amazon, while part four depicts meadows and
forests. The fifth section describes the ancient city Tabor, and it
concludes with the sixth part, Blanik, about a mountain where old
heroes sleep and are ready to rise again. Beginning with a section
inspired by the old citadel Vysehard, its most famous section is the
second, which ends with the much-criticized "two-bits cadence", and
describes a river. FTP, what is this set of 6 nationalistic tone poems
which includes The Moldau, written by Bedrich Smetana? Ernst Mach This
man's philosophy is generally described as radical empiricism, and is
described in 1906's "The Analysis of Sensations". Generally considered
the major precursor of logical positivism, the Vienna School was
originally called the society of this man, whose synthesis of
empiricism and the logical analysis of the structure of scientific
theory can be seen in "The Science of Mechanics". He is most famous
today for his scientific work, including his principle that the
inertia of a body in a system is determined by the distribution of
mass and enegy in the whole system, an idea which greatly influenced
relativity. FTP, who was this Austrian thinker whose name is now most
associated with the speed of sound? Hathor This goddess was
represented with a disc and two plumes, and a center of her worship
was Denderah, where a temple to her still stands. Similar to Isis in
that she was a goddess of love and festivity, it was said that the sun
was supposed to rise and set within her. Represented with the head of
a cow, FTP, who was this Egyptian goddess of the sky? Jorge Luis
Borges With Adolfo Bioy Casares this author of The Doer and The Book
of Imaginary Beings wrote detective stories under the pseudonym
Honorio Bustos Domecq, resulting in the book Six Problems for Don
Isidro Parodi. His early fiction was traditional, as seen in A
Universal History of Infamy, but in 1938 he suffered a severe head
wound that left him near death, bereft of speech, and fearing
insanity, leading him to produce the fantastic fiction for which he is
best-known, many of which are collected in Ficciones. FTP, who was
this Argentinian author of The Aleph? Ned Kelly Wanted by the police
on charges of killing a trooper named Fitzpatrick shortly after his
release from a three year jail term for horse-stealing, this man
joined his brother Dan, Steve Hart, and Joe Byrne in hiding, and soon
killed three policemen at Stringybark Creek. The son of an Irish
convict, after robbing banks at Euroa and Jerilderee, he and his gang
were trapped after a failed scheme to derail a police train at
Glenrowan, leading to his arrest and hanging. FTP, who is this
legendary Australian bushranger? rhodopsin (accept early answer of
visual purple) These pigments consist of a protein component linked to
a nonprotein chromophore, a derivative of vitamin A. Light falling on
this pigment is absorbed by retinal, which changes its form and
separates from the opsin component, initiating the transmission of a
nerve impulse to the brain. Its great sensitivity allows for vision in
dim light. Also known as visual purple, FTP, what is this light-
sensitive pigment found in the rods? Dulce et Decorum Est In a late
revision to this poem, the author changed lines 23 and 24 to read
“Obscene as cancer, bitter as the cud of vile, incurable sores on
innocent tongues.” Written in 28 lines, its third stanza consists of a
single couplet describing the poet’s dreams, and it concludes with a
12 line stanza which directly addresses the readers, stating that had
they experienced what the poet experienced they would never repeat to
their children what he calls “The old lie”. Its opening sonnet
describes how a man helplessly staggers toward the poet as he dies due
to a poison gas attack. FTP, what is this poem whose title refers to a
quotation of Horace, written by Wilfred Owen? Pines of Rome In the
third "picture" of this work a phonograph introduces an actual
nightingale song. Consisting of sections entitled Villa Borghese,
Catacomb, Janiculum, and Appian Way, it is a symphonic poem which
depicts four "landscapes" near the title city, and was written by
Ottorino Resphighi. Orpheus After losing his beloved, this figure
would have nothing to do with other women. This outraged the Thracian
women, who tore him to pieces, after which his body was buried by the
Muses at Mount Olympus, while his head was carried by the river Hebrus
to Lesbos, where it became a famous oracle. The Life of Lazarillo de
Tormes Often attributed to Diego Hurtado de Mendoza, this anonymous
novel is often called the first picaresque novel. Divided into 7
tratados, or chapters, it tells of the titular figure's service to a
blind man, a miserly priest, a proud squire, a mendicant friar, and a
seller of indulgences. Dioscorus This patriarch of Alexandria used the
support of Eastern Roman emperor Theodosius II to support
Monophysitism while presiding over the Robber Synod of Ephesus in 449,
where he reinstated Eutyches, deposed St. Flavian of Constantinople,
and excommunicated Pope Leo I. The Council of Chalcedon exiled him to
Gangra. fugacity (prompt on partial pressure) For a component of a
mixture this function is given by the equation d of the natural log of
the function equals d mu over RT. The ratio of this function's value
to its value in some standard state is called the activity, and it is
essentially a measure of the tendency of a component of a liquid
mixture to vaporize. FTP, what is this thermodynamic function used in
place of partial pressure in reactions involving real gases and
mixtures, symbolized f? Absalom, Absalom One of the narrators of this
novel tells the story to Shreve McCannon after he hears it from the
protagonist's sister-in-law Rose Coldfield. It tells of the son of a
poor West Virginian who desires to establish himself as the head of an
aristocratic southern family. However, after returning from the Civil
War he finds his plantation in ruins, and discovers that his son has
murdered Charles Bon, whose son is now being raised by Charles' lover,
the protagonist's daughter Judith. FTP, what is this novel about
Thomas Sutpen by William Faulkner? Applachian Spring Although
originally an opera, this work is now commonly performed as an
orchestral suite consisting of 8 sections played without interruption,
the seventh of which contains the famous five variations on a Shaker
theme entitled "Simple gifts". In it, neighbors and a revivalist
attend a celebration for a newly built Pennsylvania farmhouse intended
for a betrothed couple. Commissioned by Elizabeth Coolidge for Martha
Graham, FTP, what is this ballet by Aaron Copland? Vasco Nunez de
Balboa As he was preparing an expedition to Peru this explorer was
replaced by Pedro Arias de Avila, accused of treason, and executed.
After sailing with Bastidasin in 1501 he went to Hispanola, but to
escape creditors he hid on the vessel that took Martin de Enciso to
Panama. At Darien he replaced the incompetant Enciso and took command
of the ship, thereafter displaying the lack of rapacity and cruelty
that won him the respect and friendship of the indigenous peoples of
Central America, who accompanied him during his epic march across the
isthmus. FTP, who was this first European to discover the Pacific
Ocean? Quetzalcoatl The great temple at Cholula was dedicated to this
god, who according to one myth traveled to the east coast of his
country, where he was consumed by divine fire, with his ashes turning
into birds and his heart turning into the morning star. Said to have
ended the 2nd epoch by creating a great hurricane which turned men
into monkeys, most myths hold that he was tricked into exile from Tula
by Tezcatlipoca, after which he sailed off to a mythical land,
promising to eventually return. Impersonated by Cortez, FTP, who was
this Aztec god represented as a feathered serpent? Anders Jonas
Angstrom This scientist's work "Optical investigations" contains his
principle of spectrum analysis, demonstrating that a hot gas emits
light at the same frequency as it absorbs it when it is cooled. The
first person to study the spectrum of the aurora borealis, he
identified the presence of hydrogen in the Sun, and his 1868 work
"Researches of the Solar Spectrum" presented an atlas of the solar
spectrum with measurements of 1,000 spectral lines expressed in units
of one ten-millionth of a millimeter. FTP, who was this Swedish
astrophysicist whose name is now used to represent the unit of measure
he used? Andrew Wyeth This artist's work consists almost entirely of
works set near his summer home in Cushing, Maine and the Brandywine
Valley around his native Chadds Ford, Pennsylvania. Noted for his
technical virtuosity, he was the son of the famous illustrator Newell
Convers, and is most famous for a 1948 work depicting Anna Olsen. FTP,
who is this painter of Christina's World? Falkland Islands or Islas
Malvinas A chain of mountains run along the northern parts of this
island group's two main islands, reaching a maximum height of 2,312
feet at Mount Usborne. Home to no indigenous land mammals, its
government also administers the Shag and Clerke rocks, South Georgia,
and the South Sandwich Islands. Consisting of about 200 small islands
and the East and West main islands, one of its names was given to it
by John Strong, who made the first recorded landing there in 1690,
while its South American name comes from the port of St. Malo. With
capital at Stanley, FTP, what are these islands which in 1982 became
the focus of an unoffical war between Great Britain and Argentina?
tungsten This element has the highest melting point of any metal.
Found with calcium and oxygen in the ore scheelite, it was first
isolated in 1783 by J.J. and F. d'Elhuyer. A white or gray metallic
transition element, it is used in high speed steels and in lamp
filaments. With atomic number 74, FTP, what is this element originally
called Wolfram with symbol W? Roberto Rossellini This director made
several short documentaries for Italian television, including "Louis
XIV", which was later released as a feature film. Films like "Paisan"
and "Germany Year Zero" continued the neorealist style seen in his
first acclaimed work, the clandestinely filmed "Open City". In 1949 he
made "Stromboli", the first of a series of vehicles for Ingrid
Bergman, who later became his wife. FTP, who was this Italian director
now known as the father of the actress Isabella? Flowering Judas This
short story ends with the protagonist unable to sleep after a
nightmare in which the recent suicide Eugenio blames her for his
death. It is set during a single evening in the upper room of the
protagonist, who, while being serenaded by the vain revolutionary
Braggioni, reflects on her belief in Roman Catholicism and her time
teaching Indian children during the Mexican Revolution. FTP, what is
this short story about Laura, written by Katherine Anne Porter? the
Great Society It included the Wilderness Areas Act, Clean Water
Restoration Act, Appalachian Regional Development Act, and Economic
Opportunity Act. Its most important urban renewal measures included
the Mass Transit Act and Housing and Urban Development Act, while its
health legislation included the Older Americans Act, Medicaid, and
Medicare. Intended to create a network of social welfare assistance
and outlaw racial discrimination, it's name was first used at an
October 31, 1964 rally, but it suffered funding problems due to the
Vietnam War. The Civil Rights Act and Voting Rights Act were a part
of, FTP, what domestic agenda of Lyndon Johnson? Malachi Chapter 4,
verse 5 of this book foretells the coming of the prophet Elijah before
the "great and dreadful day of the Lord". Consisting of 6 sections
written in question and answer form, it was written just after the
period of rededication of the temple of Jerusalem, and attacks the
moral laxness of the people, especially the priesthood, relating this
laxness with the economic hardships of the time. FTP, what is this
last book of the Christian Old Testament? gonorrhea Pyomyositis is an
unusual form of the causative agent of this disease which can cause a
form of conjunctivitis which can lead to scarring and blindness.
Caused by the Neisseria bacterium, it can be mistaken for appendicitis
in women, but in men is characterized by difficulty and burning in
urination and the flow of pus from the urethra. FTP, what is this
venereal disease often coexisting with syphilis? James George Frazer
Among this anthropologist's lesser known works are "The Belief in
Immortality and the Worship of the Dead", "The Fear of the Dead in
Primitive Religion", and "Creation and Evolution in Primitive
Cosmogonies". Professor of anthropolgy at Liverpool and Cambridge,
many of his later works, like "Folklore in the Old Testament" and
"Totemism and Exogamy", were ignored due to the enormous attention
paid to his major work, an extensive cross-cultural study of religion
and mythology which takes its name from a branch broken by Aeneas
before his descent into the underworld. FTP, who was this Scottish
anthropologist, author of The Golden Bough? Leopold Bloom This
literary character was the son of Ellen Higgins and Rudolph Virag, who
killed himself two years before this man married. He has a daughter
named Milly, but his son Rudy died as an infant. Known as Henry Flower
to Martha Clifford, with whom he is conducting an epistolary love
affair, his feelings of estrangement from Ireland is a core element of
the novel in which he is found. FTP, who is this ad canvasser, the
protagonist of Ulysses? Idi Amin (Dada) This ruler rose to power from
the small Kakwa ethnic group, and eventually massacred many members of
the Langi and Acholi peoples, while his unpredictable nature was seen
in his 1972 expulsion of Asians from his country. Originally a member
of the King's African Rifles, he rose through the ranks of his nation
army while becoming national heavyweight boxing champion, and seized
power in January 1971 from Milton Obote. FTP, who was this ruler of
Uganda? Rene Descartes The revolutionary approach this thinker would
bring to philosophy was already present in his first work, the "Rules
for the Direction of the Understanding". His work "Dioptric, Meteors,
and Geometry" discussed the scientific views vital to his plan to
reconstruct the whole of philosophy using deduction and his technique
of "methodical doubt". First conceiving his mission in a famous
"stove-heated room" in the winter of 1619, he put his plan into effect
in the "Principles", the "Meditations on First Philosophy", and the
"Discourse on Method". FTP, who was this French thinker best-known for
his statement "Cogito, ergo sum"? Livonian Knights Commonly known as
the Sword-Brothers, this order was founded circa 1202 to support the
Bishop of Riga in his missionary work among pagan Latvians. After
early success, they were crushed by the Lithuanians at Saule in 1236,
after which they became a branch of the Teutonic Knights, and
disbanded in 1561 in the face of Russian threats. Navier-Stokes
equation The Laplace operator is found in this equation describing the
flow of Newtonian fluids. Named for two scientists, it states that the
partial derivative of velocity with respect to time plus v grad v
equals 1 over the density times the gradient of pressure plus the
viscosity times the Laplace operator of velocity. Brest-Litovsk One of
the negotiators of this treaty was a poor peasant abducted from a
train station to fill out the delegation, while another described its
necessity by stating that sometimes it is "necessary to sacrifice
space to gain time". Initially the Russians used delaying tactics to
buy time for a potential socialist uprising in Germany or Austro-
Hungary, but were eventually forced to give up half their European
territories in exchange for a halt to hostilities. FTP, what was this
1918 treaty which ended the Soviet Union's involvement in WWI? Camillo
Golgi This scientist discovered tension receptors in the tendons now
known as his "organs" or "tendon spindles". From his studies of
different parts of the brain he put forward his theory that there are
two types of nerve cells, sensory and motor, and that axons are
concerned with the transmission of nerve impulses. His most important
work resulted from his technique using silver salts to stain cells,
allowing him to produce the first detailed description of the
structure of the nervous system, work which was followed up by
Santiago Ramon y Cajal, with whom he would share the Nobel Prize for
Physiology or Medicine. FTP, who was this Italian biologist who first
described a series of flattened membranous cavities in the cytoplasm
of cells known as his "apparatus"? Tiresias According to one myth this
figure was punished for revealing the secrets of the gods, which he
had learned from his mother, the nymph Chariclo, while another story
holds he was punished for having watched Athena undressing to bathe.
Having lived for seven generations, he once came across two mating
snakes, and killed the female one, leading to results that were only
undone when he killed the male snake as well. Later, he contradicted
Hera’s claim that women derive less pleasure from sex than men,
leading Hera to blind him, after which Zeus gave him the powers of
prophecy. FTP, who was this blind seer who spent part of his life
transformed into a woman? The Moonstone A suicide letter written by
the maid Rosanna Spearman is an important plot development in this
novel, at the end of which the adventurer Mr. Murthwaite reveals the
final resting place of the title object, which had been brought to
England by John Herncastle. Earlier, it had been placed in a bank by
Godfrey Ablewhite and the notorious pawnbroker Luker, who had taken
advantage of a side-effect of the laudanum given by Dr. Candy to
Franklin Blake to frame him for its theft from Rachel Verinder.
Although three mysterious Brahmins are initially accused, the theft is
finally solved by Sergeant Cuff. FTP, what is this first English
detective novel by Wilkie Collins? oligarchy (accept oligarchia)
Sociologist Robert Michels devised an "iron law" concerning it, which
referred to the inevitable tendency of political groups and trade
unions to become bureaucratized and conservative, while Gaetano Mosca
insisted in "The Ruling Class" that de facto versions of them hold
power in all societies. The term was originally used by Aristotle, who
considered the quality of rule provided in differentiating it from
aristocracy. FTP, what is this political science term referring to the
rule of a small, privileged elite? 6\. After his retirement, this man
held celebrated literary salons at his estate Andalusia, having
earlier served as editor of "Port Folio", the first US literary
journal. While a member of the Pennsylvania state senate from
Sociologist Robert Michels devised an "iron law" concerning it, which
referred to the inevitable tendency of political groups and trade
unions to become bureaucratized and conservative, while Gaetano Mosca
insisted in "The Ruling Class" that de facto versions of them hold
power in all societies. The term was originally used by Aristotle, who
considered the quality of rule provided in differentiating it from
aristocracy. FTP, what is this political science term referring to the
rule of a small, privileged elite? Summa theologica or Summa totius
theologiae This work's Prima Secundae section is concerned with
general ethical questions, while its third part discusses the
salvation of the soul, emphasizing the role of Jesus and the
Sacraments. Its opening section concerns the existence and nature of
God and the universe, in which the author presents his famous "Five
Ways", or proofs, of God existence, and in general it applies
Aristotelian logic to problems of Christian doctrine, leading it to
become the doctrinal basis for the philosophy of the Roman Catholic
Church. FTP, what is this work, the masterpiece of Thomas Aquinas?
Josephson effects One of them says that as the magnetic field is
increased, the current increases from zero to a maximum, then returns
to zero and reaches a lower maximum, then returns to zero again, and
so on. The fourth has applications to high speed computing, and says
that if a potential difference is applied, a high-frequency
alternating current will flow through the junction, while the first
two say that when two superconducting materials are separated by a
thin layer of insulating material, a supercurrent can flow through the
barrier, but that when the current exceeds a critical value only
normal tunneling will occur. FTP, what are these electrical effects
named for the man who shared with Esaki and Giaver the Physics Nobel
Prize in 1973? Eugene Onegin Andrei Markov illustrated his discovery
of Markov chains by calculating the alteration of vowels and
consonants in this novel. Having discovered the shallowness and
artificiality of her beloved while browsing through his library,
Tatyana Larina soon marries Prince Gremin. The protagonist, having
originally turned down Tatyana's overtures, went on to kill his
friend, the poet Lensky, in a duel, but after becoming captivated by
Tatyana's newly-found eminence in society, declares his love, only to
be rejected. FTP, what is this verse novel by Alexander Pushkin? Ehud
Barak (or Brog) This man once killed several terrorists by donning a
dress with grenades for breasts and with explosives in his handbag.
Originally named Brog, he took a name meaning "lightning" and rose to
fame for his fearless 1972 raid on a hijacked Belgian airliner. The
youngest-ever Israeli army chief-of-staff, he entered politics as
interior minister to his mentor Yitzhak Rabin, and after serving as
foreign minister to Shimon Peres took control of the Labor Party. FTP,
who was this leader decisively defeated for prime minister by Ariel
Sharon two years after defeating Benjamin Netanyahu? Modern Painters
The fourth volume of this work consists of a detailed analysis of
mountain beauty, while the fifth presents a history of what the author
calls “Invention Spiritual”, and analyzes the role of myth in art.
Volume two contradicts the stated goal of the work by exalting great
artists of the past, while the first volume states that the author’s
goal is to prove contemporary artists’ “superiority in the art of
landscape painting”, specifically defending the works of J.M.W.
Turner. FTP, what is this mammoth work of art criticism by John
Ruskin? Dies irae Its main melody consists of the eight notes F, E, F,
D, E, C, D, and D. Quoted in the Inferno section of Liszt's Dante
Symphony, in Rachmaninoff's Isle of the Dead, in Saint-Saens' Danse
macabre, and in Berlioz' Symphony Fantastique, it is based on a poem
by Thomas Celano, and is often used to symbolize the horror attending
death after a sinful life. FTP, what is this part of the Requiem Mass,
Latin for "day of wrath"? Travesties Among the wide range of literary
effects used in this play are Wildean epigrams, a lecture on Marxist
theory, and a scene written entirely in limericks. Based on a minor
incident from Ellmann's Life of Joyce describing an amateur
performance of The Importance of Being Earnest, it is set primarily in
a Zurich library during WWI, and concerns Henry Carr's memories of
conversations between Tristan Tzara, James Joyce, and Vladimir Lenin.
FTP, what is this comedy by Tom Stoppard? Tiber (or Fiume Tevere) This
river's major tributaries include the Aniene, Chiascio, Nestore, Nera,
and Paglia. Rising on the slope of Mount Fumaiolo, it flows generally
south, and branches out into a delta whose main channels are the
Fiumara and the Fiumicino before emptying into the Tyrrhenian Sea near
Ostia Antica. Ancient writers held that it was originally named Albula
for its whiteness, but was renamed for a king of Alba Longa who
drowned in it. FTP, what is this 252 mile long river best-known for
flowing through Rome? The Winter of Our Discontent The protagonist of
this novel is prevented from killing himself by his desire to pass on
a translucent stone to his daughter Ellen in the hopes that her
honesty can redeem his family. Earlier, he had provided his alcoholic
friend Danny Taylor the means to drink himself to death so that he
could gain valuable land owned by Danny, but soon realized the error
of his ways after plotting the deportation of his boss, Alfio Marullo,
in order to gain ownership of Alfio's grocery store, all done to try
to reestablish his family's preeminence in New Baytown, Long Island.
Centering on Ethan Allen Hawley, FTP, what is this John Steinbeck
novel which takes its name from the first line of Richard III? thiols
(accept mercaptan or sulphydryl groups) Acidic compounds, their older
name comes from their ability to react with mercury. Named according
to the parent hydrocarbon, they are known for their strong
disagreeable odor, especially the ethane type, which causes the odor
of garlic. They are analogues of alcohols with the oxygen atom
replaced by a sulphur atom. Originally named mercaptan, FTP, what are
these organic compounds that contain the group -SH? Either/Or: A
Fragment of Life Part Two of this philosophical work is a defense of
romantic love and marriage presented by Judge Vilhelm, and is intended
as a response to Part One, which contains the writings of a
egocentric, melancholy young man, including reflections on Mozart and
the famous "Seducer's Diary". Subtitled "A Fragment of Life", it is
unclear whether the author meant to endorse one of the two positions
or to force the reader to make a radical, existential choice. FTP,
what is this first great work by Soren Kierkegaard? Lambert's Laws
These three laws, named for the 18th century physicist who stated
them, hold that the illuminance of a surface is inversely proportional
to the square of its distance from the light source, that if the light
hits the surface at an angle theta, the illuminance is proportional to
cosine theta, and that the luminous intensity of light decreases
exponentially with the distance that it enters a medium. Barnaby Rudge
In one sense, this novel represents an attack on capital punishment,
seen through the character of Dennis the Hangman. The main plot
concerns the feud between Geoffrey Haredale and the villain Sir John
Chester, who nonetheless join forces to thwart the marriage of their
kin Edward Haredale and Emma Chester. Meanwhile, the title figure, who
wears all green and carries a raven named Grip in a basket on his
back, is innocently implicated in the Gordon Riots, which also thwart
the plans of Haredale and Chester. FTP, what is this novel by Charles
Dickens? {Western} blotting (prompt on protein blotting) A variation
of this technique is used to screen bacterial colonies containing cDNA
clones. In it, the subject is subjected to electrophoresis on SDS-
polyacrylamide gel, then placed on a polymer sheet. A radiolabelled
antibody specific to the target protein is then added, binding to the
protein and allowing it to be detected by autoradiography. FTP, what
is this technique for determining small amounts of a particular
protein in tissue samples or cells, named analogously to Southern
blotting? Resurrection Symphony or Mahler's Second Symphony The
unusual orchestration of this musical work calls for four off-stage
horns and trumpets, unorthodox percussion instruments like tam-tams
and a bundle of sticks called "ruthe", and a second percussion group
to be "heard in the distance". Consisting of five movements, the first
three concern the death of the "hero", his youthful optimism, and his
confrontation of life's vulgarities. The human voice is first
introduced in the fourth movement, entitled "Urlicht", or "Primal
Light", and is based on the composer's own song from his cycle "Des
Knaben Wunderhorn", while the final movement is based on a poem by
Klopstock which gives the symphony its name. FTP, what is this
symphony, the second by Gustav Mahler? St. Patrick (or Succet) Founder
of the church and monastery at Armagh, this man's writings included a
letter to King Coroticus and the "Confessio". He spent 14 years at
Auxerre, France , in preparation for his life's work, for which he was
made a bishop by Pope Celestine I. The son of Calpurnius, he was
abducted by Irish marauders at the age of 16 and sold into slavery,
but after his escape withstood the opposition of the Druids and spread
the Christian faith throughout Ireland. FTP, who is this patron saint
of Ireland? The Education of Henry Adams Notably absent from this work
are the thirteen years of its author's marriage and first seven years
after his wife's suicide. Concluding that the titular subject was
inadequate to prepare the author for the modern world, its subtitle
declares it "a Study of 20th Century Multiplicity", and it seeks to
contrast the modern age to the 13th century, notably in the chapter
"The Virgin and the Dynamo". The companion piece to Mont-Saint-Michel
and Chartres, FTP, what is this famous autobiography? Stokes The
parameters of this name are four parameters that determine the state
of polarization of a wave of monochromatic radiation from observations
of the beam. The unit of this name is a cgs unit of kinematic
viscosity equal to the ratio of the viscosity of a fluid in poises to
its density in grams per cubic centermeters, while the law of this
name is given in equation form as F equals 6 pi r eta v, and predicts
the frictional force on a spherical ball moving through a viscous
medium. FTP, what is this name most associated with the theorem
extending Green's theorem to higher dimensions and stating that the
line integral around a closed path is equal to the surface integral of
the curl around any surface enclosed by the path? Tanganyika During
WWI several minor naval engagements were fought on this lake whose
overflow is carried to the Atlantic by the Lukuga River. It runs
roughly 420 miles from north to south, but only reaches a maximum
width of 45 miles, giving rise to its characteristic narrowness. At
12,700 square miles it is the second largest in Africa, and its
maximum depth of 4,700 feet makes it the second deepest freshwater
lake in the world. Just north of Lake Nyasa, FTP, what is this lake of
the Great Rift Valley on the borders of Tanzania, Congo, Zambia, and
Burundi? Prince Rupert of the Rhine While experimenting with the
making of gunpowder and boring of guns this man invented a brasslike
alloy known as his metal. A founder and first governor of the Hudson's
Bay Company, after the Restoration, he served as admiral of the
English fleet and first lord of the admiralty. The earl of Holderness,
in 1650 he had escaped to the West Indies after Blake destroyed his
fleet at the mouth of the Tagus, after having gained his greatest fame
in the English Civil War, winning at Lancaster and Bristol but losing
at Marston Moor. FTP, who was this nephew of Charles I and son of
Elector Palatine Frederick V best known as Count Palatine of the
Rhine? Taoism or Daoism This school of philosophy holds that some of
the characteristics of the source and reality of man and nature
include spontaneity, change, emphasis on the feminine and passive over
aggressive, male qualities, and nonpurposeful action, or "wu-wei". It
regards the primary purpose of human beings as living in harmony with
nature, while the religion that grew from it concerns a vast pantheon
of gods headed by the Jade Emperor. Chuang Tzu and Lao Tzu are great
thinkers of, FTP, what Chinese philosophy opposed to Buddhism which
advocates belief in "the way"? The Last Days of Pompeii In this novel,
the priest Calenus is witness to the murder of the female
protagonist's brother Apaecides by the sinister Egyptian Arbaces, who
had also tricked the blind slave girl Nydia into poisoning Glaucus.
Glaucus is wrongly accused of Apaecides' murder, but after a miracle
saves him from a lion his innocence is pronounced by Sallust, and
Glaucus escapes with his love Ione as Vesuvius destroys the title
city. FTP, what is this popular novel by Edward Bulwer-Lytton?
(Heinrich) Wilhelm (Matthaus) Olbers At the age of 21 this man devised
a new way to calculate the orbits of comets, and in 1832 predicted
that the Earth would pass through the tail of Biela's comet, sparking
widespread panic in Europe. Performing his astronomical studies from
the attic of his Bremen medical practice, in 1815 he discovered his
namesake comet, having earlier discovered the asteroids Pallas and
Vesta. However, he is best-known for questioning if the universe is
endless and uniformly populated with stars, why is the sky dark at
night. FTP, who was this namesake of a famous astronomical paradox?
John Broadus Watson "Psychological Care of Infant and Child" is a late
work by this psychologist whose advocacy of experiments on children
and animals can be seen in his work making a baby afraid of a white
rat. In 1920 he retired and became a advertising executive after a
divorce scandal involving his partner Rosalie Rayner forced him to
resign from Johns Hopkins, where he had developed the anti-
structuralist views that psychology should be dedicated to examining
and predicting human actions, expressed in his seminal 1913 article
"Psychology as a Behaviorist Views It." FTP, who was this man
considered the founder of behaviorism? Clayton Anti-Trust Act The case
Traux v. Corrigan circumvented this act by permitting state courts to
issue injunctions in labor disputes, while its prohibition of
injunctions against secondary boycotts was invalidated by Duplex
Printing Press v. Deering. It reversed In Re Debs, and forbid
interlocking boards of directors, tying contracts, and discriminatory
pricing practices, while exempting unions and farmers' associations
from antitrust statutes. FTP, what was this 1914 act which
strengthened the Sherman Anti-Trust Act? Taras Bulba Originally
published in the book Mirgorod, the plot of this novel is related to
an incident in the life of one of the author's ancestors, who became a
traitor and surrendered a fort to the Poles. Ending with a famous
description of the Dneister River and a wild duck, it is set during a
war in which Andri falls in love with a Polish woman, leading him to
desert his family and join her in a besieged fort. When his father
meets him outside the fort he kills Andri, only to join his other son
Ostap in being tortured to death. FTP, what is this short 1835 novel
about a old Cossack warrior, written by Nikolay Gogal? Giotto di
Bondone This artist painted the first ever grisailles, and although it
is not signed the Ognissanti Madonna is generally attributed to him.
Court painter to Robert of Anjou, one of the most controversial
debates in art concerns whether he was the master of the St. Francis
cycle in the Upper Church of Assisi, but there is no doubt that he
created the frescos in the chapel of Enrico Scrovegni. Known for his
break from Byzantine art, FTP, who was this student of Cimabue, the
greatest master of the pre-Renaissance period and creator of the
fresco cycle in the Arena Chapel? actinides or actinoids This
collection of elements is differentiated from other collections of its
kind in that the lighter elements have f-electrons that can
participate in bonding. Difficult to investigate due to their self-
heating, short lifetimes, and safety dangers, they are like
lanthanides in that they experience contraction of atomic and ionic
radii with increasing atomic number. Characterized by a 7s2
configuration, FTP, what is this series of radioactive elements
beginning with and named for element 89? Commodus This ruler abandoned
the Danubian War against the advice of Claudius Pompeianus, and during
a reign of terror banished and executed his wife Crispina. The son of
the younger Faustina, his determination to rule using favorites and
his savagery led to many attempts on his life, including one by his
sister Lucilla, and after becoming so mentally unbalanced that he
thought he was the god Hercules his mistress Marcia had him strangled
to death by the athlete Narcissus. FTP, name this Roman Emperor from
180-92, the son of Marcus Aurelius and last of the Antonines. House
Made of Dawn Shortly after returning from World War II the protagonist
of this novel takes a job chopping wood for Angela Grace Saint John,
with whom he soon begins a relationship. Taking part in the Feast of
Santiago, he is flogged by the albino Juan Reyes Fragua, and later the
protagonist stabs Juan in a bar, for which he is imprisoned for seven
years. Later, Abel ends up in the hospital due to a beating by the
police officer Martinez, and when visited by Angela is able to
overcome his inability to create his own creation story and fully
embrace his Navajo heritage. FTP, what is this 1966 novel, the best
known work by N. Scott Momaday? Frey (or Freyr) Among this god's
possessions are the horse Blodighofi, and Gullinbursti, a magic helmet
with the crest of a wild boar. The patron god of Sweden and Iceland,
this son of Niord fell in love and married the giantess Gerda. The
dispenser of rain, he was originally one of the Vanir, but was
received among the Aesir after the war between the two groups.
Possessor of the magic boat Skithbathnir, FTP, who is this Norse god
of peace and fertility? Ising model This is a model for magnetic
systems in which atomic spins have to be aligned either parallel or
anti-parallel to a given direction. Named for the scientist who worked
out the one-dimensional case in 1925, its application to phase
transitions has been important to the study of the subject. It Can't
Happen Here At the end of this novel the protagonist joins the
underground movement led by Walt Trowbridge. In the novel, a Vermont
editor opposes the presidential ambitions of a New England demagogue,
but nonetheless Berzelius Windrip establishes a fascist dictatorship.
Featuring the protagonist Doremus Jesup, FTP, what is this 1935 novel
by Sinclair Lewis? Turner's Syndrome (accept early answer of Noonan's
Syndrome) Surgical procedures are often required to correct symptoms
of this syndrome, including heart and circulation problems and webbing
of the skin around the neck. Similar to Noonan's Syndrome, other
symptoms include bone growths on the larger bone of the leg, a
phenomenon called "shield chest", confusion about space and distances,
dwarfism, and short metacarpals, and it is often treated with
pituitary growth hormone, androgens, and estrogen. Seen in about 1in
every 3,000 live female births, FTP, what is this syndrome resulting
in lack of ovaries and the menstrual cycle which results from a
missing X chromosome? A Theory of Justice By general consensus the
most important critique of this philosophical work is Robert Nozick's
"Anarchy, State and Utopia". The author's conception of the "veil of
ignorance" is discussed in this work popularly known as the "green
monster", which claims to examine "the grounds of ethical knowledge".
It begins by reviving the idea of a social contract, then goes on to
conclude that, unless the least advantaged group in a society is
benefited, there is no justification for anyone in a society to be
better off than anyone else. FTP, what is this landmark 1971 work by
John Rawls? The Medusa The historical event which made it famous was
sparked by the British donation of the port of St. Louis, Senegal to
the French. To transport the new governor of Senegal, Colonel Julien
Schmaltz, in 1816 four ships, the Loire, Argus, Echo, and this ship,
set sail, with the woefully inexperienced Hugues de Chaumereys in
command. Immediately making the passenger Monsieur Richefort
navigator, de Chaumereys chose to sail through the dangerous Arguin
bank, and when they were beached de Chaumereys and his rich friends
took the lifeboats and abandoned the crew on a rickety raft, where
they were eventually forced to resort to cannabalism. FTP, what was
this ship immortalized in a painting by Theodore Gericault? The Battle
of Issus The top half of this painting presents a cosmic parallel to
its main subject, with the sun on the right subjugating the moon in
the top left corner. Although the city, castle, and thousands of
soldiers depicted are drawn from the 16th century, the tablet floating
in the sky above the action indicates that it is supposed to depict a
battle between Darius and Alexander the Great. FTP, what is this
masterpiece of Albrecht Altdorfer? Havelok the Dane The story of this
character begins by recounting the parallel story of the English
princess Goldebrou, who has been left in the care of her evil guardian
Godrich. Meanwhile, this character is set adrift in the sea by the
evil Godard, but is rescued off the coast of Lincolnshire and raised
as the son of the peasant Grim. However, he soon marries Goldebrou,
learns he is the son of King Birkabegn, and raises an army to reclaim
he and his wife's birthrights. FTP, who is this hero of a middle
English romance who becomes king of the Danes. eclipsing binary stars
Two of their types are W Ursae Majoris and Beta Lyrae. The element
with the higher surface luminosity is called the primary, and the
primary minimum occurs when the primary is blocked by the secondary.
One major type is the Algol type, named for the first of these to be
discovered. With an orbital plane close to our line of sight, FTP,
what are these binary stars? liquidity The “trap” of this name occurs
when an increase in the money supply does not result in a fall in the
interest rate but merely in the creation of idle balances. In recent
times it has been measured by the degree of freedom an asset has from
the risk of fluctuation in capital value, while the traditional
measure considers how readily an asset can be converted into money.
FTP, what is this economic measure of an asset’s “nearness” to free
spending power? Curtis LeMay As a bombardment division commander in
World War II this man developed new B-17 bomber formations and bombing
techniques, and went on to lead the firebombing of Tokyo. From 1948-49
he directed the airlift to West Berlin during the Soviet blockade, and
during the 1950s developed the Strategic Air Command into a strong
deterrent force. Later he gained notoriety for his ultraconservative
views, including his statement that Vietnam should be bombed back to
the Stone Age. FTP, who was this 1968 American Independent Party
running-mate of George Wallace? Mathis der Maler (or Mathis the
Painter) This symphony's material is drawn from three scenes in the
opera of the same name: the overture, a crowd scene from the second
act, and the title figure's deathbed scene. The principle melody,
entitled "Es sungen drei Engel", first appears early in the first
movement, "Concert of Angels", and recurs in the other two movements,
The Entombment and The Temptation of Saint Anthony. The three
movements represent three panels of the Isenheim Alterpiece, the
masterpiece of the titular 16th century painter. FTP, name this
symphony, the masterpiece of Paul Hindemith. Villette In this novel,
supernatural elements like the appearance of the mysterious, deformed
Madam Walravens heighten the protagonist’s feelings of isolation.
Attracted to the doctor John Bretton, John’s flirtations with Ginevra
Fanshawe and Pauline Home lead the protagonist to become attached to
Paul Emmanuel, the headmaster at the Brussels girls’ school where she
works. FTP, what is this novel about Lucy Snowe written by Charlotte
Bronte? Friedel-Crafts reactions On some occasions alcohols or alkenes
undergo these reactions which occur at about 100 degrees Celsius in
the presence of an aluminum chloride catalyst. Electrophilic
substitution occurs because the catalyst acts as a electron acceptor
for a lone pair on the halide atom, producing a positive charge on the
group involved. FTP, what are these reactions in which an alkyl group
or an acyl group is substituted on a benzene ring, named for both a
French and American chemist? the Druze or Druse This religious group
warred with the Ottoman Turks and the Christian Maronites, preparing
the way for French control of the eastern Mediterranean countries
known as the Levant, but they gave up their autonomy in 1944, shortly
after their 1925-27 occupation of Damascus. A unitarian faith
combining Christian, Muslim, Jewish, and Sufist ideas, they number
about 1 million worldwide, and believe in the divinity of Hakim, the
sixth caliph of the Fatimid dynasty. Probably taking their name from
their first apostle, Ismail Darazi, FTP, what is this religious
community found primarily in Syria, Lebanon, Israel, and Jordan?
National Industrial Recovery Act or NIRA The so-called "Little"
version of this legislation included the Connally Act and Miller-
Tydings Act. Conceived as an alternative to the Black-Connery Bill,
Section 9 of Title 1, which allowed the president to prohibit from
interstate commerce oil produced in violation of state quotas, was
declared unconstitutional in Panama Refining Company v. Ryan, the
first such New Deal law to be struck down. Its other provisions,
including the banning of yellow- dog contracts and funding for the
Public Works Administration, were collectively struck down in
Schlecter Poultry Corporation v. United States. FTP, what was this
1933 act which established the NRA, the New Deal's major law for
national economic recovery? The Bone People The protagonist of this
novel becomes involved with a man named Joe Gillayley, who beats his
mute adopted son Simon, causing him to lose his sense of hearing. The
protagonist, Kerewin Holmes, is a solitary part-Maori woman who
experiences a spiritual awakening while fishing, drinking, and writing
among the remote coastal villages of New Zealand. FTP, what is this
Booker Prize winning 1984 novel, the best-known work by Keri Hulme?
Kamchatka Peninsula The southern terminus of this land mass is Cape
Lopatka, and its chief city is Petropavlovsk. Discovered by Atlasov,
its central valley is drained by the namesake river and enclosed by
parallel chains of active volcanoes, the highest of which,
Klyuchevskaya Sopka, is the highest in all of Siberia. Second only to
the Caspian as Russia's chief fishing region, FTP, what is this
peninsula which separates the Bering and Okhotsk Seas? Dahomey (prompt
on Benin) This kingdom began training female warriors under King
Agadja. Beginning when Ouegbadja conquered the kingdoms of Adjatche
and Allada, it became notorious for its so-called "grand customs" and
"minor customs" involving sacrifices in honor of dead kings.
Subjugated by the Oyo kingdom of the neighboring Yoruba kingdom in the
1720s, it regained power in the early 19th century, becoming famous
for its trade in palm oil and its slave trade. Based at the capital
Abomey, FTP, what was this African kingdom which gained independence
from France in 1960 and in 1975 renamed itself the Republic of Benin?
Rhiannon This mythological figure was supposed to marry Gwawl, but
using a bag which could never be filled with food was able to trick
Gwawl into giving her up to her beloved, Pwyll, king of Arberth. The
main myth tells of her punishment to carry visitors to Arberth to the
castle on her back after her young son wandered off to the farm of
Teirnon Twrvliant, prompting the six women charged with his
supervision to smear her face and hands with animal's blood and accuse
her of his murder. FTP, who is this woman of Celtic myth perhaps best-
known as the subject of a Fleetwood Mac song? Goodbye, Columbus This
novella was originally published along with five short stores,
including “The Conversion of the Jews”,“Epstein”, and “Eli, the
Fanatic”. The protagonist first falls in love with Barbara Patimkin
after watching her swimming in a pool, but after a summer romance Neil
Klugman’s insults about Barbara’s upper-crust lifestyle strain their
relationship. FTP, what is this novella which established the
reputation of Philip Roth? Work function Occurring in the Richardson
equation for thermionic emissions, as well of Einstein's photoelectric
equation, this is the function that determines the extent to which
emissions will occur. It is sometimes expressed as a potential
difference symbolized by phi or as the energy required to remove an
electron symbolized by W. Lady Susan The title character of this early
epistolary novel has used her superficial charms to make both Mr.
Mainwaring and Sir James Martin fall in love with her. She woos the
gullible Reginald de Courcy and terrorizes her 16 year-old daughter
Frederica, who she threatens to marry off to Martin. Carbonari (or
Carbonaria) Literally meaning "charcoal burners", these were members
of a secret organization that emerged in southern Italy during the
Napoleonic Wars. Although involved in a number of insurrections from
1817-31, they never developed a clear program, and with other
organizations like the Adelfi and Federati it was superceded by better
organized groups. William Hamilton The mathematician of this name is
best-known for inventing quarternions. {Pompey} the Great [accept
Gnaeus {Pompeius} Magnus] Lucius Sulla ordered this man to recover
Sicily and Africa from the Marians, and this man crushed a revolt led
by the consul Marcus Lepidus. He helped Metellus fight against
Sertorius in Spain, and his son Sextus became a pirate after losing at
the Battle of Munda. Aulus Gabinius granted this man powers to fight
off the Cilician pirates in Lex Gabinia, and he helped end the slave
rebellion led by Spartacus. Ptolemy XIII ordered the assassination of
this man in Egypt, and he was defeated at the Battle of Pharsalus. For
10 points, name this member of the First Triumvirate who fought Julius
Caesar in a civil war. August {Strindberg} Though not Dante, this
author wrote Inferno, in which his alter ego travels through hell and
emerges purified of his sins. One character by this author locks the
Captain in a room while she examines his private papers; that
character appears in The Father. He wrote about Old Man Jacob Hummel,
who instructs Arkenholz to attend a performance of Richard Wagner, and
his most famous work features a character who commits suicide with a
razor given to her by Jean. For 10 points, name this Swedish author of
The Ghost Sonata and Miss Julie. {Simon and Garfunkel} [accept {Tom
and Jerry} until mentioned] One song by this group concludes
“September I’ll remember; a love once new has now grown old.” This
group that sings “April Come She Will” was originally known as Tom and
Jerry, and one of their songs describes “People talking without
speaking, people hearing without listening.” Some of this group’s
lyrics were famously misunderstood by Joe DiMaggio. Several of this
group’s most successful songs were featured in the 1968 film The
Graduate, including “Scarborough Fair” and “The Sound of Silence”. For
10 points, name this American soft rock duo behind “Mrs. Robinson”.
{Tay-Sachs} disease The presence of hepatosplenomegaly can help
distinguish the closely- related Sandhoff disease from this disease.
This disease is caused by a mutation of a gene on chromosome 15, which
causes an enzyme that breaks down fatty acids to become less active.
The reduced activity of the enzyme hexosaminidinase A is caused by a
mutation in the HEXA gene, and the buildup of ganglioside inhibits
neurons in the brain. One characteristic symptom of this disease is a
red spot on the retina. For 10 points, name this autosomal recessive
disorder that is common among Ashkenazi Jews. {Marduk} [accept {Bel}]
This mythological figure built a palace named Esharra after his
greatest victory, and he gave his son Nabu a dragon named Mushussu.
His father warned a figure of a great flood that would destroy
mankind, and his four horses each held poison in their mouths. He
organized the years into months after his victory over a monster. He
created tornados with the winds given to him by Anu, and he disturbed
a monster that he would later defeat with a net and an arrow. For 10
points, name this god who defeated Tiamat in a battle to become the
chief god of Babylon. The {Temple of the Golden Pavilion} [accept
{Kinkaku}-ji] This novel’s protagonist scratches a navel cadet’s sword
because of jealousy, and one of his friends expresses a preference for
“useless” art forms. Another part sees the main character given a
carton of cigarettes by a soldier in return for stepping on a
prostitute’s stomach, and that prostitute later commits suicide after
extorting money from Father Dosen. The protagonist owes money to the
clubfooted Kashiwagi, and he is constantly obsessed by the beauty of a
temple. For 10 points, name this Yukio Mishima novel in which
Mizoguchi burns down the title building. {Saladin} [accept {Salah} ad-
Din Yusuf ibn Ayyub] This leader's rise to power came with the death
of Shirkuh and the assassination of Shawar, and his title was malik,
or “king”, instead of “sultan”. This man’s much larger force was
routed by young King Baldwin at the battle of Montgisard. He was
unable to take Tyre after defeating Baldwin’s later successor King Guy
at Hattin, and he suffered one of his largest defeats at Arsuf. His
domains eventually stretched from Egypt to Syria as part of the
Ayyubid Empire. For 10 points, name this chivalrous Muslim ruler who
in 1187 retook Jerusalem and defended it against Richard the Lionheart
in the Third Crusade. Republic of {Fiji} [accept Matanitu ko {Viti}]
This nation’s Naitasiri Province contains the Sovi Basin, and its
northernmost point is the Udu Point, which was recently hit by two
earthquakes. Rewa River is the widest river in this nation and has its
headwater in Mount Tomanivi, the highest point in this nation. The
Kadavu Island is the third largest island in this nation, and its
international airport is located by the Bligh Water in Nadi. The Koro
Sea is located in this country and a large portion of the population
lives on its two largest islands, Vanua Levu and Viti Levu. For 10
points, name this South Pacific island nation with the capital at
Suva. {R}obert {Browning} [prompt on {Browning}] This author wrote a
work in which a character states “God’s in his Heaven / All’s right
with the world!” This author of Pippa Passes wrote a poem in which the
title figure sends Lucrezia to her “Cousin”, while in another, a
character from The Tempest tries to infer what his god must be like.
This author of “Caliban upon Setebos” and “Andrea del Sarto” wrote
about a man who strangles his lover with her long yellow hair, while
his most famous work ends with the speaker showing his guests a
sculpture of Neptune taming a seahorse. For 10 points, name this poet
of the dramatic monologues “Porphyria’s Lover” and “My Last Duchess”.
Erik {Erikson} This man stated that every living thing develops
through a predetermined unfolding of their personalities, a statement
known as the epigenetic principle. He studied the children of Yurok
Native Americans with Alfred Kroeber, which led to his work Childhood
and Society. He outlined a series of internal conflicts including
“industry vs. inferiority” and “trust vs. mistrust” in his most famous
theory. For 10 points, name this psychologist who coined the phrase
“identity crisis” and theorized the eight stages of psychosocial
development. Battle of {Crécy} One side set up defensively south of
Abbeville during this battle, and the other side attacked their
Genonese mercenaries for retreating. This battle saw the first use of
cannons on the European battlefield, and one victorious commander in
it used as his emblem three white feathers taken from King John of
Bohemia, who was slain in this battle. This battle was followed by the
Siege of Calais, and longbowmen positioned on a hill inflicted heavy
casualties on their opponent’s charging knights. For 10 points, name
this 1346 battle in which Edward III and the Black Prince led England
to victory over French king Philip VI during the Hundred Years’ War.
Antonín Leopold {Dvořák} This composer quoted the song of the scarlet
tanager in the third movement of one of his chamber works, and he
included a Kolo and an Odzemek in a group of sixteen pieces originally
written for piano for four hands. He caught the attention of Johannes
Brahms with his Stabat Mater. This composer used an unusual 4/8 time
in the first movement of a symphony which alludes to “Swing Low, Sweet
Chariot”. This composer of the “American” Quartet was inspired by the
Hungarian Dances to compose his Slavonic Dances. For 10 points, name
this Czech composer of the Symphony No. 9 in E minor, “From the New
World”. {Proton}s Its antiparticle was first discovered by Chamberlain
and Segrè, and the Tevatron is used to accelerate these particles to
relativistic speeds. Grand unified theories have predicted that this
particle has a half-life of ten to the thirty second years, although
its decay has never been observed. Hydrogen is used in its namesake
NMR spectroscopy, and they are composed of a down quark and two up
quarks. These particles are bound together by the strong nuclear
force, and the atomic number denotes the number of these in an atom.
For 10 points, name these positively charged particles in the nucleus.
{Calvin}ism A faction of this faith, Lapsarianism, believes that the
Fall of Man was planned by God. This religion believes in the doctrine
of the perseverance of saints, known as “once saved, always saved”. It
believes in parts of Common Grace, which is the belief that God gives
undeserved gifts to all humans, and this religion also follows the
doctrine of Irresistible Grace. It rejects the idea of
transubstantiation, and believes that the Eucharist is purely
symbolic. For 10 points, name this branch of Christianity whose
namesake founder outlined the concepts of predestination, the elect
and total depravity in this denomination’s founding work, Institutes
of the Christian Religion. {Billy Budd}, Sailor In this novel, the
main character resolves to never be subject to a public flogging, and
that character beats the Red Whiskers, turning the Red Whiskers’ hate
for him into love. One character sends Squeak to harass the
protagonist repeatedly, although the Dansker befriends him and helps
him onboard. The protagonist is originally a sailor on the Rights-of-
Man, but he is impressed into service onto the H.M.S. Bellipotent.
John Claggart is killed by the main character after he accuses him of
mutiny, and Captain Vere sentences the protagonist to hang for his
crime. For 10 points, name this novel about a title sailor, written by
Herman Melville. {Collagen} In one condition involving this molecule,
kidneys are unable to filter waste products from the blood due to a
failure of the basement membranes. An improper synthesis of types 1
and 3 of this molecule results in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Although it
is not elastin, glycene and prolene are extensively prevalent in this
protein, which is converted to amino acids by cortisol. This protein
has a triple-helix structure, and it is the most common protein in
humans. Malformation of this protein can cause hyperelasticity of
joints. For 10 points, name this dominant component of connective
tissue. {Minecraft} Blaze rods were added in a pre-release update to
this game, as well as lily pads and 9 new music discs. The Yogscast
does a fiction series on this game called “Shadow of Israphel”.
Herobrine was a rumor going around during the beginnings of this game,
and ravines were added in an update several months ago. Until
recently, creepers have been the most feared monsters in this game.
For 10 points, name this video game in which you explore a very blocky
world and build things, usually out of blocks. Great Proletarian
{Cultural Revolution} Shortly before this period, Hai Rui Dismissed
from Office was criticized. Also during this period, Lin Biao’s plane
mysteriously crashed in Mongolia. This period saw many “big-character”
posters, the first of which was created by Nie Yuanzi, and the Four
Olds were attacked, leading to the loss of many artifacts and
historical records. Red Guards attacked hundreds of thousands of
people throughout the country during this period, and it saw the “Down
to the Countryside Movement”. For 10 points, name this tumultuous
period in Chinese history. Isabel {Allende} Llona In a short story by
this author, Elena is rejected by Jose Bernal after spying on her
mother. This author of “Wicked Girl” wrote a series of stories
dedicated to the author’s unconscious child in Paula. She wrote about
the granddaughter of Eliza Sommers in Portrait in Sepia, and about a
title character that falls in love with Rolf Carle. In another of her
works, Clara prophesies that she will marry Esteban when she is
nineteen years old. This author of Eva Luna created the Trueba family
in another novel. For 10 points, names this Chilean author of The
House of the Spirits. {Summa Theologica} [accept {Summa Theologiae}]
This work states that monks and bishops are in a state of perfection,
and theorizes that natural law is the participation of the eternal
law. This work introduces proper authority, reasonable cause, and
right intention as the three conditions for “just war” in its second
section, which is titled “Ethics”. It posits that an endless regress
of causation and movement is not possible, and it contains the
argument that there must be an unmoved mover. This work includes the
quinquae viae, five proofs of the existence of God. For 10 points,
name this unfinished treatise by Saint Thomas Aquinas. {Kurd}s One
recent reformist political party of this ethnic group is known as
Goran, or Change. This group established the short lived Republic of
Ararat and fought for independence in the Barzani Revolt. One member
of this people established the Ayyubid Caliphate. Almost constant
oppression of this people has caused a diaspora and the genesis of the
Peshmerga. Ali Hassan al-Majhid used chemical weapons against this
people during Saddam Hussein’s genocidal An-Anfal Campaign, and the
PKK fights for this people’s independence in Turkey. For 10 points,
name this ethnic group of Saladin and Jalal Talabani, the largest
stateless people, centered in northern Iraq and southern Turkey.
{Ferromagnet}ism The fact that this property emerges from interaction
with regions separated by Néel or Bloch walls is demonstrated by the
Barkhausen effect. Lithium gas has been shown to exhibit this property
at low temperatures. A statistical model named for Ising describes the
phase changes in this property. Hysteresis allows this property to
persist until an external effect, such as heat, is applied. For 10
points, name this effect, which disappears completely above the Curie
temperature, exhibited by substances such as cobalt and iron. The
{Unbearable Lightness of Being} [accept {Nesnesitelná lehkost bytí}]
In this novel, a character’s passport is taken as he crosses the
border, preventing him from ever leaving his country after returning.
Marie-Claude is abandoned by Franz for another woman, and the dog
Karenin dies of a tumor in this work. One character worries her
photography may have aided the regime after she was promoted from the
darkroom, while another character is forced to become a window washer
after refusing to retract a newspaper article. At this novel’s
conclusion, Sabina moves to California after being informed of the
deaths of Tereza and Tomas in a car accident. For 10 points, name this
work by Czech author Milan Kundera. Igor {Stravinsky} This composer
referred one of his works as his “war symphony”, which he wrote as a
response to World War II. Along with Symphony in Three Movements, he
composed an opera based on the paintings of Hogarth and wrote an
atonal ballet for twelve dancers known as Agon. He composed a work
lacking violins and violas, whose three sections were inspired by
three chapters of the Bible. In addition to Symphony of Psalms,
another of his ballets sees Prince Ivan helped by the title creature,
while the section “Adoration of the Earth” begins another of his
works. For 10 points, name this Russian composer of The Firebird and
The Rite of Spring. {Alaska} This state contains Wiki Peak as part of
the Nutzotin Mountains, and it contains the George C. Thomas Memorial
Library. The Homer Spit is located in the Kenai Peninsula of this
state, and is bordered by an arm of the Cook Inlet. A collection of
totem poles can be found in its Sitka National Park, and the Iditarod
Trail Race occurs in this state. The Yukon River empties into the
Bering Sea in this state, and it contains the highest mountain in
North America, Mount McKinley. For 10 points, name this northernmost
U.S. state with cities such as Fairbanks, Anchorage, and Juneau. A
{Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man} The protagonist of this work
is teased for having a name that sounds too Latin, and the early parts
of the book deal with that character attending school at Clongowes.
Mr. Casey is enraged by Dante’s condemnation of a dead political
leader, and this novel’s protagonist becomes a hero among his
classmates after being unfairly pandied by Father Dolan.  The
protagonist feels affection for Emma, a childhood friend, and his
friends in the university include Davin and Lynch. At the end of this
novel, the protagonist chooses to exile himself from Ireland. For 10
points, name this semi- autobiographical novel about Stephen Dedalus,
a work by James Joyce. {Sisyphus} According to one myth, this figure
kidnapped Anticlea and fathered Odysseus. His son was trampled to
death by his own horses for dishonoring Aphrodite, and this figure
secretly marked the hooves of his cattle to prove the theft of
Autolycus. He created the Isthmian Games after finding the body of
Melicertes, and he received a spring from Asophus for revealing the
location of Aegina. He once captured the god of death, Thanatos, and
he returned from the underworld to reprimand his wife Merope for
denying him a proper funeral, then refused to return. For 10 points,
name this figure who was condemned to roll a boulder up a hill for
eternity. {Pulsar}s These objects possess a magnetic field whose axis
of symmetry is offset from the rotation axis, giving rise to the
lighthouse effect. In these objects, the decay of an extraordinarily
strong magnetic field can provide energy, in which case these stars
are called magnetars. These stars can derive their energy from the
gravitational energy of accreted matter, as is the case for one of
these objects at the center of the Crab Nebula. These objects were
first discovered by Hewish and Bell and were initially termed Little
Green Men. For 10 points, name these rapidly spinning neutron stars
which emit radiation unevenly, resulting in a characteristic flash.
Charles André Joseph Marie {de Gaulle} Several attempts on this man’s
life were made by the OAS, and he formed the RPF political party after
his military service. He showed the need for a mechanized and mobile
army in his 1934 book The Army of the Future, and he succeeded René
Coty. Under his leadership the Evian Accords were negotiated, ending
the Algerian War. This man rose to power by politically outmaneuvering
Henri Giraud and his rule saw France become the world’s fourth nuclear
power. For 10 points, name this leader of the Free French during World
War II, the founder and first President of the French Fifth Republic.
“The {Hollow Men}” Images in this poem include a “Multifoliate rose”
and “Sunlight on a broken column.” The narrator of this poem describes
“Eyes I dare not meet in dreams, in death’s dream kingdom” and
declares “Between the essence and the descent falls the Shadow.” This
poem substitutes the “prickly pear” into a children’s song, and the
epigraph for this poem reads, “Mistah Kurtz--he dead.” For 10 points,
name this poem concluding “This is the way the world ends, not with a
bang but with a whimper,” a poem about “stuffed men” by T. S. Eliot.
{Redox Reaction} [accept {Oxidation-Reduction Reaction}] The
adrenochrome hypothesis states that adrenaline is this type of
reaction, causing schizophrenia. In biology, water, sodium chloride,
and nitrogen are the namesake signaling molecules for this type of
reaction. In geology, red, green, and white rock formations are the
results of this type of reaction. The Nernst equation describes
galvanic cells, which operate via these reactions, which are divided
into two half-reactions in which electrons are transferred. For 10
points, name this class of reactions involving alterations in
oxidation states. Norman {Rockwell} In one painting by this man, six
figures wearing uniforms all face the title region, while another
depicts the title figure and a police officer engaged in a
conversation at a diner. This painter of Beyond the Easel and The
Runaway also depicted four white men escorting a young black girl in
The Problem We All Live With. He depicted himself smoking a pipe three
times in Triple Self Portrait, and he depicted a family dinner in his
Freedom From Want. For 10 points, identify this American painter of
Four Freedoms. {Zen} Buddhism [prompt on {Buddhism} or {Mahayana}
Buddhism] One of sect of this school of thought emphasizes the
shikantaza practice, and one important practice in this school of
thought is kensho. Its branches include Obaku, while another of its
branches was founded by Dogen. Texts important to this religion
include the Blue Cliff Record and The Gateless Gate, and its origin
can be traced back to the Flower Sermon. Its Soto and Rinzai sects
differ on the emphasis over meditation on koans. For 10 points, name
this branch of Mahayana Buddhism commonly practiced in Japan. Salvador
{Dali} One of this artist’s works depicts Shirley Temple with the body
of a lioness, while another painting shows a knife and fruit basket
hovering "still" in midair. This painter of Living Still Life also
created a painting with twenty-eight Venus de Milos, The
Hallucinogenic Toreador. Other works by this artist include a couch
shaped like the lips of an actress, as well as a sculpture of a
telephone made with the body parts of a lobster. Along with Mae West
Lips Sofa, this artist painted a scene featuring a swarm of ants and
melting clocks. For 10 points, name this surrealist painter of The
Persistence of Memory. John {Steinbeck} In a work by this man, a
privateer named Henry Morgan sacks the city of Panama, while a paisano
named Danny receives two houses from his grandfather in another. In
addition to Cup of Gold and Tortilla Flat, he wrote a novel in which
Coyotito is shot and the title object is thrown into the sea by Kino.
This author of The Pearl created a character who envisions tending
rabbits with George on their own land, and one of this man’s novels
follows the Joad family during the Dust Bowl. For 10 points, name this
creator of Lennie Small, who authored Of Mice and Men and The Grapes
of Wrath. {X} chromosome This structure is associated with a lysosomal
storage disease caused by deficiency of alpha-galactosidase A known as
Fabry’s disease. The lack of the gene FMR1 on this structure can lead
to mental retardation, a syndrome in which this structure is
“fragile.” In a process known as lyonization, one of these structures
deactivates to form a Barr body, and a missing one of these structures
causes Turner syndrome. Males that possess an extra copy of this
structure have Klinefelter syndrome, and red-green color blindness is
a recessive trait linked to this structure. For 10 points, name this
sex chromosome of which females possess two. David {Ricardo} This
economist argued that government fiscal policy should not influence
consumer spending in his namesake equivalence theory. He argued for
the use of metal as currency in The High Price of Bullion, and
asserted that high commodity prices increase rent. This opponent of
the Corn Laws used a work by Thomas Malthus to propose that wages paid
by employers in the long run would equal the minimum wage needed for
survival. He described his theories in Principles of Political Economy
and Taxation. For 10 points, name this British economist who proposed
comparative advantage. {J}ohn Fitzgerald {Kennedy} [accept {JFK};
prompt on {Kennedy}] This man appointed Sargent Shriver as the first
director of the Peace Corps. During World War II he commanded the
patrol boat PT 109, and his administration was proven to have had
knowledge of the plot to assassinate Ngo Dinh Diem. The Whiz Kids were
part of his Department of Defense led by Robert McNamara, and his
administration executed the unsuccessful Bay of Pigs invasion. He won
the 1960 Presidential Election against Richard Nixon, and as
president, he faced Nikita Khrushchev in the Cuban Missile Crisis. For
10 points, name this president who was succeeded by Lyndon B. Johnson
after his 1963 assassination. New York {Giants} [prompt on {New York}]
This team defeated the Chicago Bears in “The Sneakers Game,” and won
the first Pro Bowl against the All-Stars. A player from this team
became the first quarterback to use the phrase "I'm going to Disney
World,” and their current quarterback had the most interceptions in
the league last season. They implemented a kneel-down formation after
losing the “Miracle at the Meadowlands,” and their current stars
include Justin Tuck and Hakeem Nicks. For 10 points, name this NFL
team led by quarterback Eli Manning, who won Super Bowl XLII against
the undefeated Patriots. {Jane Eyre} In this novel, Robert Leaven
informs the protagonist about the death of John, a bully from her
childhood, and Miss Scatcherd beats one character with a pile of
sticks for no apparent reason. The protagonist of this novel is
humiliated when she is ordered to stand on a stool by Mr.
Brocklehurst, and her best friend Helen Burns dies during a typhus
epidemic at the Lowood School. After the death of the insane Bertha
Mason, the protagonist returns to Thornfield Manor and reunites with
her lover Edward Rochester. For 10 points, name this novel by
Charlotte Bronte. Saint Simon {Peter} the Apostle [prompt on {Simon}
or {Simeon}] Along with John, this figure cured the lame man at the
Beautiful Gate, and he judged Ananias and Sapphira after they tried to
deceive the Apostles. He was imprisoned in Jerusalem by Herod, and
once judged the magician Simon Magus. His brother Andrew was also an
Apostle, and this figure was the only Apostle Christ appeared to on
the first day after the Resurrection. He was crucified in Rome upside
down, and his name means “the rock.” The holder of the keys to heaven,
he denied knowing Jesus three times. For 10 points, name this first
Pope called a “fisher of men.” Federative Republic of {Brazil} This
country contains the Town of Diamantina, and the island of Marajó is
located at the mouth of this country’s longest river. This country
contains the Mantiqueira Mountains in its southeast, and the longest
river that runs entirely in this country is the Sao Francisco. This
country also contains the Iguazu Falls near Curitiba, and a region
full of swamps and marshes is known as the Pantanal. Rocky slopes
descend into the sea at its Guanabara Bay. For 10 points, name this
South American country whose cities include Sao Paulo and Rio di
Janeiro. {Doppler} effect [accept {Doppler} shift] Canal ray tubes
were used to investigate a form of this phenomenon predicted by
special relativity in the Ives-Stillwell experiment. This phenomenon
has a transverse form, and the Lorentz transformation is used to
derive the relativistic form of this effect, which can be used to
measure the radial velocity of galaxies. Changes in spectral lines
caused by this effect are known as blueshift and redshift. For 10
points, name this perceived change in the frequency of a wave from a
moving source, exemplified by sirens on fire trucks. {Jason} [accept
{Easun}] This figure fathered the twins Euneus and Nebrophonus with
Hypsipyle on his visit to Lemnos. This brother of Promachus helped
drive away the harpies from Phineas, and he was secretly trained by
Chiron. He helped Hera cross the Anauros, and released a dove when
going through the Symplegades. King Aeetes asked this figure to sow
the teeth of a dragon, and Pelias received an oracle saying that this
figure would harm him. For 10 points, name this leader of the
Argonauts and the lover of Medea who recovered the Golden Fleece. The
{Song of Roland} [accept La {Chanson de Roland}] In this work, Aude
dies of grief when learning that her lover is dead, and the villain of
this work is chained and guarded by a master cook. Turpin falls dead
while trying to bring some water for his comrade, who tries to break
his sword against a rock before confessing all his sins. Ganelon
encourages Marsilla to kill the title character, who initially ignores
the advice of Oliver and refuses to blow his oliphant horn. For 10
points, name this French epic featuring the Battle of Roncevaux Pass,
during which the title paladin of Charlemagne dies. {Pictures at an
Exhibition} [accept {Pictures from an Exhibition} or {Pictures of an
Exhibition} or {Kartinki s vystavki}] This work depicts the heroes
from “Bylina” known as bogatyrs in its final movement, and its sixth
movement compares Two Jews: Rich and Poor. Another movement depicts a
hut with chicken legs belonging to the witch Baba Yaga, and five
“Promenades” in this work represent walking between paintings. The
final movement of this work is known as “The Great Gate of Kiev,” and
this suite was inspired by a display of Viktor Hartmann’s works. For
10 points, name this piano suite by Modest Mussorgsky. Sir Ahmed
Salman {Rushdie} In one novel by this author, Dr. Shakil marries
Sufiya, and this author of Shame described a mass sterilization
program which affects Parvati-the- witch, Shiva, and Saleem. Children
who are born at the moment of India’s partition possess special powers
in this author’s Midnight’s Children. His most controversial work
depicts Saladin Chamcha and Gabriel Farishta surviving an airplane
explosion over the English Channel. For 10 points, name this author
who had a fatwa issued against him for his novel The Satanic Verses.
{Thus Spoke Zarathustra} [accept {Also Sprach Zarathustra}] One
chapter in this work suggests that there is mastery to dying at the
right time. Another chapter accuses priests of seeing life as a
torment, and therefore wanting to make others suffer as well.
Advocates of democracy are depicted as tarantulas who seek revenge on
those unequal to them. A tightrope walker falls to the ground in one
scene in this work, and he is told that there is no devil or hell. The
camel, the lion, and the child are the three steps to becoming the
Overman, or Ubermensch, according to this work. For 10 points, name
this work about the founder of Zoroastrianism written by Friedrich
Nietzsche. {Etruscan} civilization [accept {Rasenna} before mentioned]
This civilization was eventually defeated at Cumae by Hiero of
Syracuse, and these people’s name for themselves was Rasenna. This
civilization gained considerable power in the Mediterranean after
defeating the Greeks at the Battle of Alalia, and their deities
included Merva, Uni, and Tini. Its city of Clusium was ruled by Lars
Porsena, and rulers of a foreign city who descended from this
civilization included Tarquinius Superbus. For 10 points, name this
civilization centered in the Tuscany region that controlled most of
modern-day Italy prior to the Romans. {Henry VIII} [prompt on {Henry}]
This man’s armies were victorious at the Sieges of Boulogne and he was
a signatory of the Treaty of Ardres. During this king’s reign, the
Earl of Surrey stopped a Scottish invasion by defeating them at the
Battle of Flodden. The Pilgrimage of Grace occurred during this king’s
reign, and he had Sir Thomas More beheaded for violating the Treason
Act. This king had the Common Book of Prayer written and he issued the
1st Act of Supremacy. For 10 points, name this 16th century second
Tudor King of England known for his many wives, who established the
Anglican Church and had two daughters, Mary I and Elizabeth I. The
{Arnolfini Wedding} [accept {Arnolfini Portrait} or anything about
{Arnolfini} and his {bride}] A red fruit can be seen on the window
sill on the left this painting, and a figure in a green dress wears a
golden bracelet around her neck. That figure also wears a white veil
on her head, and a chandelier with a single candle appears above the
convex mirror. A feather duster is hung around the bed post on the
right, and a pair of red sandals appears below a red chair. A large
signature states that its painter “was here”, and a brown dog stands
below the two main figures. For 10 points, name this depiction of a
couple holding hands, a work by Jan van Eyck. {Kidney}s Although not
the lungs, antibodies target a structure in these organs in
Goodpasture’s syndrome. They detect decreased oxygen levels and
release erythropoietin, stimulating erythrocyte generation. Their
failure is characterized by a decrease in the glomerular filtration
rate, as well as increased createnine serum levels. This organ
responds to vasopressin which increases fluid retention. It filters
blood through nephrons, and dialysis performs this organ’s function.
The adrenal glands are located above, For 10 Points, what structures
connected to the bladder by the ureter. George Bernard {Shaw} [accept
{Caesar and Cleopatra} before “this author’s”] Pothinus warns Caesar
that the library of Alexandria is burning in one of this author’s
works. In addition to writing Caesar and Cleopatra, this author wrote
a play in which the Commander is killed by Don Juan and decides to
visit Hell because he found Heaven too boring. Jack Tanner marries Ann
in his Man and Superman, and Andrew Undershaft makes a donation to the
Salvation Army in another of his plays. This author of Major Barbara
wrote a work centering on the main character’s wager with Colonel
Pickering. For 10 points, name this Irish playwright who wrote about
Henry Higgins tutoring Eliza Doolittle in Pygmalion. Soren
{Kierkegaard} In one of his works, this thinker argues that God is
indistinguishable from man, his absolute paradox. He called money an
abstraction in one of his early works, which was titled Two Ages. In
one work, he contrasted the knight of infinite resignation with the
knight of faith. That work sought to disprove Hegel’s claim that
Christianity can be explained by philosophy and discussed Abraham’s
sacrifice of Isaac. In another work he contrasted the aesthetic and
ethical stages of life. For 10 points, name this Danish father of
existentialism, the author of Fear and Trembling and Either/Or.
ANSWER: {Honduras} This nation’s southern border is defined by the
Coco River. The Swan Islands of this country are approximately 95
miles north of its coast, and 500 miles from New Orleans. The
Caratasca Lagoon is located in the northeastern part of this country,
and the La Mosquitia region of this country contains the Rio Platano
Biosphere Reserve. This country that borders the Pacific Ocean through
the Gulf of Fonseca is also home to the Islas de la Bahia. For 10
points, name this Central American country borderd by Nicaragua, El
Salvador, and Guatemala with capital at Tegucigalpa. {Zinc} [accept
{Zn}] When bonded to Iodine, this element can react with alkenes to
form cyclopropanes in the Simmons-Smith reaction. In the Clemmensen
reduction, an amalgamate of this element is reacted with hydrochloric
acid to form alkanes. Ions of this element are bonded to residues of
cysteine and histidine in “treble clefs” and “gag knuckles”, which can
recognize DNA and package RNA, functions of this element’s namesake
fingers. This metal is utilized in the galvanization of steel, and
pennies made after 1982 are mostly comprised of this metal. For 10
points, name this element with atomic number 30, which can combine
with copper to form brass. {Second Punic} War [prompt on {Punic} War]
Syphax switched sides during this war, and was defeated at the Battle
of the Great Plains. The Siege of Saguntum helped provoke this war,
but the Spanish theater of this war was closed after Mago lost the
Battle of Ilipa. This war provoked the First Macedonian War, and
Fabius Maximus pursued a delaying strategy as one side’s dictator
after early defeats like Lake Trasimene and Trebia. Scipio Africanus’
invasion of Africa led to the end of this war at the Battle of Zama.
The Romans were catastrophically defeated at Cannae after Hannibal
invaded Italy across the Alps as part of, for ten points, what early
third century BCE war between Rome and Carthage? “{Take on Me}” This
song’s music video begins with a black and white cartoon sketch of a
motorcycle race, and after the transition to live-action, the winner
of that race invites a woman at a table in a restaurant into his two-
dimensional world. This song opens, “Talking away, I don’t know what,
what to say,” and the singer declares, “I’ll be coming for your love,
okay,” prior to the chorus. This song’s chorus ends with the line
“I’ll be gone in a day or two,” hitting an extreme high note on the
word “two.” For 10 points, name this song by the Norwegian pop band
A-ha, whose chorus instructs the listener to “take me on.” {Cry, the
Beloved Country} In this novel, Tomlinson and Dubula campaign for
equal rights for all citizens. Bus boycotts make travel difficult for
its protagonist, and one of the characters is arrested along with
Matthew. The protagonist stays at the house of Mrs. Lithebe, and is
originally called to the city by a letter from Theophilius Msimangu.
That letter states that the main character’s sister Gertrude is ill,
and that the son of the protagonist will be hanged for the murder of
Arthur Jarvis. Absalom is found in prison by his father Stephen Kumalo
in, For 10 points, what novel by Alan Paton? {Zoroastrian}ism
According to this religion, the hero Yima was killed by the serpent
Azi Dahaka. Adherents of this faith believe that the demon Vizaresh
drags the evil souls into the House of Lies at the Chinvat Bridge. An
important concept in this religion is the contrast between asha and
druj, or truth and lies. Gayomart is the first human-being according
to this religion, whose dead followers are left exposed in Towers of
Silence. This religion follows the Zend-Avesta and centers on the
struggle between Ahriman and Ahura Mazda. For 10 points, name this
dualistic Persian religion. The {Planets} The idea for this work was
suggested by Clifford Bax. Originally scored as a piano duet, the last
movement of this work was instead scored for an organ. A chorus is
located in a separate room in one movement of this work, whose music
was given to the musicians two hours before its premiere performance
in the Queen’s Hall. Its last movement has the chorus fade out at the
end, and is called “The Mystic”. This suite contains “The Magician”
and “The Bringer of Peace,” as well as the “Bringer of Jollity”. The
“Bringer of War” is a well-known movement in, For 10 points, what
eight-movement suite by Gustav Holst based on celestial objects such
as Mercury? {Capacitance} This quantity increases by a factor of one
plus the amplitude gain in the Miller effect, and the reciprocal of
this quantity is elastance. It can be calculated for an isolated
sphere as 4 pi times epsilon naught times the sphere radius, and the
energy in devices associated with this quantity is one half this
quantity times voltage squared. Dielectrics can increase it, and for
two parallel plates this quantity increases with area and decreases
with distance. This quantity is also equal to charge over voltage. For
10 points, name this quantity typically measured in farads that is
associated with devices capable of storing charge. Emile {Durkheim}
This man abandoned the notion of collective conscience in favor of
collective representations. He differentiated material from non-
material social fact, and posited that totemism is the most elementary
level of religion. He divided the main characteristic of religion
between sacred and profane, and contrasted organic and mechanical
solidarity in The Division of Labor in Society. For 10 points, name
this author of The Elementary Forms of Religious Life who described
altruistic, egoistic, anomic, and fatalistic types of the title action
in Suicide. {Coyote} According to one myth, this figure’s first wife
became pregnant after consuming one of this figure’s lice. He wrestled
with the Lizard over whether humans should have hands, and attempted
to stay awake all night in order to receive a new name. He
eavesdropped on everyone while replacing the moon, and he created the
star Arcturus while juggling his eyeballs. Sometimes known as the “Old
Man,” he is also credited with the creation of men by kicking a ball
of mud. For 10 points, name this canine trickster god in Native
American mythology. Dwight David {Eisenhower} This man used Operation
Quicksilver to conceal an invasion, and this man was criticized by the
GI General for having a poor grasp of tactics. This man oversaw the
Battle of Falaise pocket, and he ordered the seventh army under George
S. Patton to take Messina in accordance with General Montgomery’s
invasion plan. He authorized the execution of Eddie Slovik for
desertion, and organized Operation Overlord. For 10 points, name this
man, who served as the Supreme Commander of Allied forces in WWII and
oversaw the Normandy landing on D-Day. {Invisible Man} [do not accept
“The Invisible Man”] In this novel, Mr. Emerson’s son informs the
protagonist that his “recommendation letter” is fake. The protagonist
of this novel steals a coin bank from Mary, and was previously
expelled from college by Dr. Bledsoe. The protagonist is mistaken as
Rinehart in several occasions near the end of this novel, and he is
injured when a boiler explodes during a fight with Lucius Brockway at
Liberty Paints. Tod Clifton quits the Brotherhood and starts selling
dolls instead, and Ras the Exhorter begins a riot at the end of this
novel. For 10 points, name this novel featuring a “Battle Royal”
scene, a work by Ralph Ellison. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes
of the {Wealth of Nations} One part of this work argues that
governments will always prefer to borrow money rather than increase
taxes when funding wars. Another section deals with the progress of
opulence and discusses the aftermath of the fall of the Roman Empire.
That section also discusses the superiority of industry over
agriculture, and the concept of division of labor is illustrated by a
pin factory. This work attacks mercantilism and protectionist tariffs,
and argues that individuals are led by an "invisible hand" to benefit
society. For 10 points, name this treatise on economics by Adam Smith.
{Wind}s Adiabatic cooling causes the Santa Ana or Diablo varieties of
this phenomenon. Barbs on the sides of Stüve diagrams indicate one of
their properties, and station models use flags on tails to plot their
magnitude. Its speed is measured with an anemometer and described
using the Beaufort scale, and this phenomenon is weak or nonexistent
in the doldrums. Jet streams are a type of these, and unequal heating
of the surface of the Earth gives rise to sea and land varieties. For
10 points, name this movement of air from high pressure to low
pressure which is utilized by sailboats. The {Hangover} In this movie,
one character cuts himself after giving a short speech about a wolf
pack. Eddy cannot annul a marriage without Jade present in this work,
and Leslie Chow is found in the trunk in one scene. One character in
this movie warns that “everything that happens in Vegas will stay in
Vegas, except herpes.” The main characters illegally obtain a police
car and wake up to find Mike Tyson’s tiger in their bathroom. For 10
points, name this movie in which three friends lose their friend Doug
in Vegas and manage to get to a wedding on time. {Peter} the {Great}
[accept {Peter I}] This ruler’s first wife was Eudoxia Lopukhina, but
he forced her to become a nun ten years after their marriage. The
Bulavin Rebellion occurred during this man’s reign. This ruler gave a
portrait of himself as a gift to William III, and established his
country’s first naval base, which was named Taganrog. This ruler went
on a tour in the West with his “Grand Embassy,” and upon his return,
he imposed a beard tax on his people. He won the Battle of Poltava,
forcing Charles XII to flee into the Ottoman Empire. For 10 points,
name this Russian tsar who won the Great Northern War and built St.
Petersburg. {Candide} The protagonist of this work meets the daughter
of Pope Urban X on his voyage to enlist in the Spanish Army. He and
his companions are robbed in Cadiz, and the protagonist buys his
freedom from the police with diamonds in Paris. He later encounters
his former servant Cacambo, who instructs him to go to Constantinople.
The title character and Pangloss are accused of causing an earthquake
at Lisbon, and early in this work, he is thrown out of Baron Thunder-
ten-Tronckh's castle for kissing Cunegonde. For 10 points, name this
work by Voltaire. {Merlin} This figure once disguised someone as
Gorlois. As a child, he was almost sacrificed by Vortigern, but he
saved himself by telling the king of a vision in which a white dragon
defeats a red dragon. In one story, he was seduced and betrayed after
mentoring Vivien. His downfall was arranged by Morgana le Fay, and
according to legend, he built Stonehenge. This figure designed the
Round Table, and he was a friend and adviser of Uther Pendragon. The
creator of the test of the sword in the stone, For 10 points, name
this legendary magician who advised King Arthur. {Hydrogen bond} The
bifurcated variety of these entities are present in beta-sheets, and
they are considered electrostatic attractive forces rather than
dispersive ones. They are responsible for the stability of alpha
helices, and they keep nucleotides in DNA bonded together. These
entities form between nitrogen, fluorine, or oxygen and a namesake
element, and account for the high boiling point of water. For 10
points, identify these interactions named for the element that must be
present for them to occur. Achille-Claude {Debussy} This composer of
Twelve Etudes formulated his “21-note scale,” and he wrote a pair of
works for piano called Two Arabesques. He wrote a French counterpart
to Mussorgsky’s The Nursery, one section of which is “Golliwogg’s
Cakewalk.” This composer of Children’s Corner wrote an opera featuring
Prince Gollaud, Pelleas et Melisande, and a flute solo represents the
title character in his composition based on a Stephen Mallarme poem.
“Play of the Waves” is one of the movements in another of this
composer’s works. For 10 points, name this French composer of La Mer,
“Clair de Lune,” and Prelude to the Afternoon of a Faun. Tom
{Stoppard} [accept Tomas {Straussler}] In one play by this author, Max
and Charlotte star in a play by Henry entitled House of Cards, while
in a different play, Henry Carr recounts his experiences meeting James
Joyce and Vladimir Lenin. This author of The Real Thing and Travesties
wrote a play in which Higgs and Moon are shot by Puckeridge. Septimas
teaches science to Thomasina in his Arcadia, and this author of The
Real Inspector Hound wrote a play in which a coin comes up heads many
times in a row. That work ends with the two title characters from
Hamlet being killed. For 10 points, name this author of Rosencrantz
and Guildenstern are Dead. Republic of {Iceland} [accept {Lydveldid
Island}] This country is home to the largest waterfall in Europe,
Dettifoss. The largest national park in Europe contains the former
Skaftafell National Park in this country. Its largest airport is named
Keflavík, and its second largest city is Akureyi. With its source at
Hofsjökull, Thjorsa is this country’s longest river. Eight percent of
this country is covered by Vatnajökull, the largest glacier in Europe.
This island nation is located on the Mid Atlantic Ridge, and the
island of Surtsey is its southernmost point. For 10 points, identify
this Scandinavian nation with capital at Reykjavik. The {Republic}
[accept {Politeia}] One character in this work uses an analogy of a
deaf and blind ship owner to demonstrate that true knowledge is viewed
as useless by society. Another man in this work refutes an argument
using a comparison of the soul to a virtuous city. Glaucon argues that
virtue is not its own reward with the legend of the Ring of Gyges, and
this work posits that Philosopher-kings would rule an ideal
government. It contains the story in which a group of shackled
prisoners see shadows against a wall. For 10 points, name this work
containing the allegory of the cave, a work by Plato that describes
the city-state. Walt {Whitman} One poem by this author features a
series of italicized stanzas in which a pair of birds sing songs on
Paumanok. The conclusion of that poem focuses on the sea singing to
the “solitary me” about death. This poet of “Out of the Cradle
Endlessly Rocking” wrote “Flood-tide below me! I watch you face to
face” in “Crossing Brooklyn Ferry.” Another of his poems concludes
with the lines “But I / with mournful tread / Walk the deck my Captain
lies, Fallen cold and dead,” and that poem was written after the
assassination of Abraham Lincoln. For 10 points, name this poet who
wrote “O Captain! My Captain” and Leaves of Grass. {Echinoderm}ata
This phylum’s members have a pair of pouches that split from the
archenteron, with each pouch constricting into three portions. Members
of this phylum draw in water through madreporites, which are a part of
their water vascular system, and they move by utilizing hydrostatic
pressure to move five rows of tube feet. Some species in this phylum
have their teeth arranged in a structure called “Aristotle’s lantern.”
This phylum includes the classes Holothuroidea and Asteroida, and
species in this phylum exhibit radial symmetry. For 10 points,
identify this phylum which includes sea urchins and sea star, whose
name means “spiny skin” in Greek. {Darius I} [accept {Darius the
Great} of Persia; prompt on {Darius}] This man became an emperor by
assassinating Bardiya with the assistance of six other nobles, and the
Behistun inscription details this man’s suppression of eight “lying
kings” shortly after he came to power. He divided his empire into
twenty satrapies, and introduced Zoroastrianism as the state religion
of his empire. This ruler sent his brother-in-law Mardonius to punish
Athens and Eretria for supporting the Ionian revolt. For 10 points,
name this Persian emperor who lost at the Battle of Marathon and was
succeeded by his son, Xerxes I. {Odyssey} [accept {Odysseia}] The
protagonist of this work proves his identity to his father by
mentioning a fruit tree from his childhood. A ship turns into a stone
and sinks to the bottom of the ocean in this work, and the protagonist
forbids his wife from moving their bridal bed made from an olive tree.
A man named Elpenor falls off a roof and dies in this work, and a maid
recognizes her master’s scar, which he received on a boar hunt. The
dog Argos greets his master in this work, and the protagonists’
followers are killed for eating the sacred cows of Helios. For 10
points, name this work about the father of Telemachus returning from
the Trojan War, a work of Homer. Simple {Harmonic Oscillator}s [accept
Simple {Harmonic Oscillation} or Simple{ Harmonic Motion} or {SHO} or
{SHM}; prompt on partial answer] The Einstein model of solids
considers each atom as a quantum mechanical version of one of these
systems. They can be classified using a quantity given by 2 pi times
the energy stored over the energy dissipated, also known as the Q
factor. These systems may undergo damping, and the frequency of these
objects is equal to the square root of the stiffness k over mass.
Pendulums are an example of these systems at small amplitudes, and
they can be described mathematically by setting Newton’s Second Law
equal to Hooke’s Law. For 10 points, name these objects, exemplified
by a mass on a spring. {I and the Village} A figure can be seen under
a yellow building in this painting, and a white cross appears above
that building. A man wears a ring on his index finger in this
painting, and an upside-down woman plays a violin on the top right.
Next to her is a man walking with a scythe, and a glowing tree appears
in the hand of a man on the bottom. A woman milks a goat on the left
of this painting, and the face of a large green man wearing a necklace
appears on the right. For 10 points, name this painting involving
Yiddish and Russian folk themes, a work by Marc Chagall. {Moses}
[accept {Moshe}] God once instructed this figure to put his hand in
his chest, causing it to become white as snow. This younger son of
Amram threw a tree into the water of Marah in order to make it
drinkable, and he aided the seven daughters of the shepherd Jethro in
Midian. This brother of Miriam once brought forth water by striking a
rock with his staff, and he killed an Egyptian overseer for beating a
slave. The brother of Aaron, he once saw God in the guise of a burning
bush. For 10 points, name this figure who led the Israelites out of
Egypt and received the Ten Commandments. The {Four Seasons} [accept Le
{Quattro Stagioni}] A movement in one of these compositions simulates
the call of a cuckoo, and in that same movement, a goldfinch and a
turtledove can be heard singing. A repeated two-note figure in the
viola provides an image of a barking dog in one of these works, each
of these which was accompanied by a sonnet. These works were
originally included in the collection The Contest Between Harmony and
Invention. For 10 points, name this set of violin concertos by Antonio
Vivaldi that includes Summer and Winter. {Luigi} In one appearance,
this character is mistaken for a deserter and is kidnapped on a ship
headed for the Beanbean Kingdom. This character drives the Streamliner
in Mario Kart DS, and he is given the Poltergust 3000 by Professor E.
Gadd in one game. Along with Ness and Kirby, he is not turned into a
trophy by Tabuu in Subspace, and his Final Smash in that game is
Negative Zone. He is blasted into space with the Toad Brigade in
another adventure, and later on, this character is freed by the player
in Ghostly Galaxy. For 10 points, name this character who recently
appeared in both Super Mario Galaxy and its sequel, Mario’s brother in
green. {Philip II} of Spain [accept {Philip the Prudent}; prompt on
{Philip}] One of this ruler’s wives was Anna of Austria, the mother of
his successor to the throne. This man appointed Antoine Granvelle
chief counselor to Margaret of Parma, and he fought against Henry IV
of France as part of the Catholic League during the French Wars of
Religion. This man had William the Silent assassinated, and his
advisor Antonio Pérez killed Juan de Escobedo. He sent his half-
brother Don Juan of Austria to command his fleet at the Battle of
Lepanto. For 10 points, name this Habsburg king of Spain who attempted
to invade England with the Spanish Armada. {Horus} [accept {Hor} or
{Har} or {Heru} or {Harmakhis} or {Harpocrates} or {Harsiesis} or
{Harakhte} or {Haroeris}] This deity received a new hand from his
mother after she threw the previous one into the marshes. He was
raised on the island of Chemmis, and was outraged when his mother
withdrew the harpoon which had struck her target. His four sons
guarded the canopic jars, and he won a boat race by using a wooden
boat while his opponent used a boat made out of stone. Hathor restored
his sight by pouring milk into his eyes, and he fought his evil uncle
Set in order to avenge his father Osiris. For 10 points, name this
falcon-headed Egyptian god. {Catch-22} One character in this novel
makes a list of “feathers in his cap” and “black eyes” every night.
Kid Sampson is killed by the propeller of a low- flying plane, and a
character who claims to be a photographer for Life magazine is named
Hungry Joe. Michaela is raped and murdered by Aarfy in this novel, and
the world’s entire supply of Egyptian cotton is bought by the M&M
Enterprises. The protagonist is deeply affected by the death of
Snowden, and a glitch in the IBM machine results in the promotion of
Major Major Major Major. For 10 points, name this novel featuring a
World War II bombardier named Yossarian, a work by Joseph Heller.
{Tang} Dynasty This dynasty conquered the Eastern Gokturk and
implemented the Jimi system. Its Emperor Xianzong waged wars against
the military governors Jiedushi, and Buddhism was suppressed during
its Hu-chiang period. Wu Zetian interrupted this dynasty until the
rise of Emperor Shang, and a great decline occurred when Luoyang was
captured in the An Lushan Rebellion. This dynasty produced the poets
Du Fu and Li Po. For 10 points, name this Chinese dynasty established
by Emperor Gaozu, which succeeded the Sui Dyansty. Lake {Baikal}
Bolshiye Koty is a town located on the western shore of this lake, and
the largest bay in it is the Barguizin Bay. The mountain region Dauria
lies to the east of this lake, whose Proval Bay was created by an 1862
earthquake at a river delta. The islands of Ushkani and Olkhon are
located in this lake, and the Selenga and Barguzin rivers drain into
it. Its sole outlet is the Angara River, and it is located in the
republic of Buryatia and the province of Irkutsk. For 10 points, name
this Russian lake, the oldest and the deepest in the world. Leo
{Tolstoy} One character created by this author almost kills Dolokhov
in a duel, while another falls in love with the maid Maryanka. In a
novel by this author, Dmitri Nekhludoff falls in love with Maslova,
who is sent to a prison in Siberia for supposed murder. In addition to
The Cossacks and Resurrection, he wrote a novel in which the title
character hurts his side and questions the quality of his life, The
Death of Ivan Ilyich. Pierre marries Natasha at the end of one of his
novels, and in another, the title character throws herself in the path
of a train. For 10 points name this Russian author of Anna Karenina
and War and Peace. Franz {Boas} This anthropologist studied the
cranial size differences between immigrants and their children. He
studied differing pronunciation in his essay “On Alternating Sounds,”
and he conducted research on the migration patterns of the Inuit on
Baffin Island. This man studied the practice of potlatch, and he
argued that anthropologists need to examine one’s actions in terms of
that individual’s own culture. This proponent of cultural relativism
also studied the culture of the Kwakiutl tribes and founded the
anthropology department at Columbia University. For 10 points, name
this author of The Mind of Primitive Man, who also taught Margaret
Mead. {Magnetic Field} [accept {B-field}] This entity's presence in a
two-dimensional conductor creates Landau levels in the quantum hall
effect. The Lorentz force on a particle is given by charge times
velocity cross this entity, which is equal to the curl of the vector
potential. They are expelled from superconductors in the Meissner
effect, and Faraday’s law of induction describes how a changing one
produces an electrical current. They are formed when an electrical
current passes through a solenoid, and Gauss showed that the
divergence of these entities is zero unless monopoles exist. For 10
points, name this entity most commonly associated with objects with
north and south poles. Battle of {Saratoga} One general in this battle
took over the troops of Ebenezer Learned without authority, and Major
Armstrong was unable to order that general to return until the
fighting had ended. General Poor’s brigade was the first to come to
the aid of Daniel Morgan’s attack, and a sniper fatally wounded Simon
Fraser in one phase of this battle. The losing commander never
received reinforcements from Henry Clinton, and this battle took place
at Bemis Heights and Freeman’s Farm. John Burgoyne was defeated by
Benedict Arnold and Horatio Gates in, For 10 points, what 1777
American victory is often dubbed the turning point of the
Revolutionary War? {Liberty Leading the People} [accept {La Liberté
guidant le peuple}] In this painting, a boy holds a saber behind a
barricade of rocks on the left, while a man lies on the ground without
a shoe in the bottom. Another man wearing a bandanna crouches and
stares at the central figure, while a peasant holding a cutlass stands
in the left. A bearded man is wearing a top hat next to the peasant,
and he holds a musket with both hands. The bare-breasted central
figure wears a Phrygian cap, and a boy wielding two pistols stands
next to her. For 10 points, name this painting commemorating the July
Revolution, a work by Eugene Delacroix. {Confucianism} One follower of
this school of thought argued that education and societal ritual were
needed to create human goodness. This view caused a rift between that
scholar, Xunzi, and another of this philosophy’s disciples, Mencius.
Followers of this school of thought aim to become “gentlemen,” or
junzi, and its founder laid out the five basic relationships. Other
core concepts of this belief system include ren and filial piety, and
prominent texts in this philosophy include the Analects. For 10
points, name this philosophy often combined with Buddhism,
historically practiced in China. {Krebs Cycle} [accept {citric acid
cycle} or {tricarboxylic acid cycle} or {TCA}] One enzyme in this
process known as acontinase is involved in a rehydration reaction
after a dehydration one. Ubiquinone is degraded in one step by a
protein using a FADH2 cofactor, and fumarate is formed in the only
membrane-bound step of this process. This process takes place in the
mitochondrial matrix after pyruvate decarboxylation forms acetyl
coenzyme A, and it produces NADH. For 10 points, name this metabolic
pathway that is followed by the electron transport chain, an anaerobic
process central to cellular respiration. {Ho} Chi Minh [accept
{Nguyen} Sinh Cung or {Nguyen} Ai Quoc] This man wrote Notes from
Prison while jailed in China, and he negotiated an agreement with Jean
Sainteny that allowed France to continue stationing troops in his
country. The opposing delegation from this man’s country to the Geneva
Accords was led by Bao Dai, and this man’s eight-point plan was
ignored by Woodrow Wilson at the Versailles peace conference. Vo
Nguyen Giap led this man’s army to victory at Dien Bien Phu, and the
trail named for this man was used to transport supplies for the war he
waged against Ngo Dinh Diem. For 10 points, name this leader of the
Viet Minh, who commanded the North to victory in the Vietnam War.
{Oedipus} This character was once abandoned at Cithaeron, and in one
play this character tries to torture a shepherd for information. He
was adopted by Merope and Polybus, and is later asked to become king
of Corinth. Creon returns from Delphi to tell this character how to
end a plague, and Tiresias later refuses to tell him the murderer of
King Laius. At the end of one work in which he appears, he realizes
that he has committed incest with his mother Jocasta. For 10 points,
name this character from Greek tragedy who appears in plays by
Sophocles at Colonus and as the King. Tennessee {Williams} This man’s
rewrite of his Battle of Angels features the musician Val, who always
carries a guitar with him. In one novel by this man, the truck driver
Rosario is killed, and Alvaro falls in love with Serafina. This author
of Orpheus Descending and The Rose Tattoo wrote a work in which Maxine
ties up one character in a hammock because he tries to swim to China.
That character, Larry, later begs Hannah to free a tied-up iguana. A
character created by this man kisses Laura Wingfield, while another is
the son of Big Daddy, who drinks himself to death. For 10 points, name
this author of The Glass Menagerie and A Streetcar Named Desire. {DNA}
[accept {Deoxyribonucleic acid}] The Hoecht stain binds to the minor
groove of this molecule, forming G-quadruplexes. The ratio of nitrogen
isotopes in this molecule, which exists in A, B, and Z forms, was
measured in the Meselson-Stahl experiment to give evidence for its
semiconservative replication. It winds around proteins called
histones, and Okazaki fragments are formed when its namesake enzyme
travels from the 5-prime to 3-prime direction of this molecule adding
nucleotides. For 10 points, name this molecule that carries the
genetic information of living organisms. {Magikarp} Totodile used
Water Gun to juggle three of these Pokemon in one episode, and Nurse
Joy from Orange Islands was saved by a giant one of these. Jimmy owned
a shiny one of these Pokemon, and they can be bought on Marvelous
Bridge, the only place in Unova where they can be acquired. Their hard
platings prevented Meowth from eating one of them, and James was
tricked into buying one of these on the St. Anne. Team Rocket’s
submarines are usually modeled after this Pokemon. For 10 points, name
this fish Pokemon whose signature move, Splash, does absolutely
nothing. {French and Indian} War [prompt on {Seven Years} War before
mentioned] Old Briton was cannibalized in a raid in this war, and one
leader claimed that the Covenant Chain had been broken in the events
leading up to it. In this war, forces under General Abercrombie were
defeated at the Battle of Carillon, but the British were able to seize
Fort Ticonderoga the following year. The Marquis de Montcalm and
General James Wolfe were killed at the Battle of the Plains of
Abraham, and George Washington surrendered Fort Necessity during this
war. For 10 points, name this North American phase of the Seven Years’
War, in which Quebec was ceded by France to Britain. {Bystander
Effect} John Darley and Bibb Latané once demonstrated this phenomenon
using an experiment involving smoke slowly filling a room. One of the
factors influencing it is diffusion of responsibility, which provides
evidence for why it is more prevalent when larger populations are
present. Good Samaritan laws attempt to reduce this phenomenon, one
famous example of which include Winston Mosely’s murder of Kitty
Genovese. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in which onlookers
amidst wrongdoing generally do nothing. {Shinto}ism The title of one
important text in this religion is translated as “Record of Ancient
Matters.” Children participate in a festival at ages three, five, and
seven as a rite of passage in this faith. Another important concept in
this religion is the possession of a true heart, and deities live on
the Plain of High Heaven. In this religion, spirits possess the power
of creation, known as musubi, and shrines in this religion have torii
at their entrances. Adherents of this religion worship spirits of
nature known as kami. For 10 points, name this indigenous religion of
Japan. {Pericles} This man sponsored the Megarian Decree and quelled a
rebellion by Miletos and Erythae. He initiated the Samian war and
blockaded Potidea in a conflict with Corinth. He consolidated his
power by expelling Cimon, and he built the Long Walls to the port of
Piraeus. His consolidation of the Delian League helped provoke a war
in which he delivered a Funeral Oration and later died of the plague.
For 10 points, name this statesman who fought the Peloponnesian Wars
against Sparta, and helped to construct the Parthenon as the leader
during the Golden Age of Athens. {Ammonia} [accept {NH}{3} before
mentioned] This substance's ability to form metal ligands is
exemplified in the coordination complex it forms with copper and
water, Schweitzer's reagent. This substance is bubbled into a solution
of sodium chloride in one implementation of the Solvay process, and is
converted to nitric acid in the Ostwald process. One process that
produces it uses an iron catalyst at high temperature. That process,
known as the Haber-Bosch process, is used to create this chemical
commonly used in fertilizers. For 10 points, identify this compound
with chemical formula NH3 which is commonly used as a household
cleaner. Diego {Velázquez} This man popularized a new type of still
life painting called the bodegon. He depicted the myth of Arachne in
his Las Hilanderas, and showed a woman sewing a piece of cloth in The
Needlewoman. He painted a wild drinking party in his Los Borracho, and
depicted Ambrosio Spinola’s victory in The Surrender of Breda. He
painted the Cupid holding up a mirror for a goddess in his Rokeby
Venus. He became the leading artist in the court of King Philip IV,
and depicted the young Infanta Margarita with her attendants. For 10
points, name this Spanish baroque painter of Las Meninas. Publius
{Ovid}ius Naso This man bid farewell to his friend Tibullus in an
elegy, and wrote the five volumes of Sorrows while living in the town
of Tomi. Inspired by Callimachus’s Aetia, he wrote a poem dedicated to
the months of January to June and its religious festivals, Fasti. He
was exiled by Augustus for writing about love-making in his Ars
Amatoria, and his most famous work includes the story of Actaeon as
well as the story of Pyramus and Thisbe. For 10 points, name this
Roman poet who wrote Heroides and Metamorphoses. {Ontario} [prompt on
{Canada} before “province”] This location is home to the world’s
largest fresh water sand bar and dunes system, Sandbanks Provincial
Park. Although not Jamaica, Kingston is a city in this region. Most of
this province’s area is located east of the Lake of the Woods, and the
city of Thunder Bay is located in this province. Other notable cities
in it include Mississauga and Windsor, and the Golden Horseshoe is its
most densely populated area. It is bordered to the west by Manitoba.
The CN tower in Toronto is located in, For 10 points, name this most
populous Canadian province that contains Ottowa. {Leviathan} or The
Matter, Forme and Power of a Common Wealth Ecclesiasticall and Civil
One section in this work states that human action is based on the
“passions,” while another divides justice into “commutative” and
“distributive” types. This work asserts that imagination is “nothing
but decaying sense” and posits that a strong central government is
needed to prevent disorder, which the author defined with the motto
bellum omnium contra omnes. Containing sections titled “Of Man” and
“Of Commonwealth,” it states that life is "solitary, poor, nasty,
brutish and short." For 10 points, name this work that favors an
absolute monarchy, a work by Thomas Hobbes. The {Red and the Black}
[accept {Scarlet and Black}; accept {Le rouge et le Noir}] One
character in this novel faints after seeing the protagonist decorate
the cathedral. The protagonist declines Fouque’s offer of going into
the lumber business, and an anonymous letter from Valenod reveals the
protagonist’s first affair. Abbe Pirard hires the protagonist as his
secretary after leaving the seminary, and the protagonist impregnates
Mathilde de La Mole. Their marriage is stopped by a letter from Madame
de Renal, which reveals the protagonists’ previous affairs. The
protagonist is guillotined at the end of this novel and given a
funeral ceremony in a cave. For 10 points, name this novel about
Julien Sorel, written by Stendhal. {Index of Refraction} [accept
{Refractive Index}] In minerals, the Gladstone-Dale relation can be
used to compute this quantity, while the Lorentz-Lorenz equation is
used to relate it to polarizability. The Lensmaker's formula gives the
focal length of a lens in terms of the radii of curvature of the two
lens surfaces and this quantity, while Brewster's angle is the
arctangent of the ratio of this quantity for each medium. Objects
exhibiting birefringence possess multiple values for this quantity,
which also gives the ratio of the sines of the angles of incident
light waves in Snell’s law. For 10 points, name this quantity, the
ratio of the speed of light in some substance to the speed of light in
a vacuum. The {Picture of Dorian Gray} One character in this novel
gives a yellow book to the protagonist, who then ends up buying nearly
a dozen copies of it. The protagonist meets one character at party
held by Lady Brandon, and the chemist Alan Campbell is blackmailed
into destroying the body of that character. The protagonist starts a
relationship with Hetty Merton, and Sybil Vane commits suicide when
the title character ends their engagement. Basil Hallward creates the
title object, and the protagonist of this work is corrupted by Lord
Henry Wotton. For 10 points, name this novel by Oscar Wilde. {Black
Hole}s Most X-ray binaries are thought to consist of one of these
objects and an ordinary star. The Kerr metric is used for the spinning
ones of these, while the Schwarzschild metric describes the non-
spinning, uncharged ones. These objects, which usually form when
gravitational force overcomes degeneracy pressure, can be completely
characterized by their mass, charge, and spin, according to the no-
hair theorem. The cosmic censorship hypothesis claims that these must
always have event horizons to prevent their singularities from being
visible. For 10 points, name these objects from which light cannot
escape. Frédéric {Chopin} This man’s 24 preludes of Opus 28 did not
include “Devil’s Trill.” Yundi Li won this composer's namesake
competition by playing his Scherzo No. 2 and several other works. He
composed a Polonaise nicknamed “Heroic,” as well as many Mazurkas.
This man composed a prelude nicknamed “Raindrops,” and he wrote
another work to commemorate the November Uprising. For 10 points, name
this Polish composer of the “Revolutionary Etude” and the “Minute
Waltz,” famous for his nocturnes. {Loki} This figure turned a
peasant’s child into an egg, and hid him in a flounder to keep him
safe from Skrymsli. This father of Eisa brought Idun and her apple
back to the Asgard from the giant Thiazi. He captured Andvari using a
net given to him by Ran, and once lost an eating contest to fire. He
mothered Sleipnir with the stallion Svadilfari, and his wife Sigyn
caught the venom that would drop on him. He tricked Hoder into killing
Balder with a spear of mistletoe. For 10 points, name this father of
Hel and the wolf Fenrir, the trickster god of Norse mythology. George
{Gershwin} This man’s piece for violin and piano entitled Short Story
combined his Novelette in Fourths and Sixteen Bars without a Name. He
reworked material from his Prelude in G for piano into his Concerto in
F. This composer was inspired by a visit to Havana to compose a piece
originally called Rumba. He used taxi horns to help depict the title
city of one of his symphonic poems. This composer of Cuban Overture
was inspired by the rhythms of a train for his piece beginning with a
clarinet trill and glissando. For 10 points, name this American
composer of An American in Paris and Rhapsody in Blue. {Louis XIV}
[accept {Sun King} before mentioned; prompt on {Louis}] This ruler
survived a rebellion lead by the Parlements [PAR-l’-mahn] as a child,
and his armies were victorious at the Battle of the Dunes. This man
acquired Franche-Comte through the Treaty of Nijmegen, and he began
the War of Devolution, which led to the dissolution of the League of
the Rhine. He dealt with the Fronde during his reign, and this
participant in the War of Spanish Succession repealed the Edict of
Nantes. For 10 points, name this French monarch who built a palace in
Versailles and was known as the “Sun King.” {Achilles} This figure
killed Mnemon for not reminding him to avoid killing any sons of
Apollo. This figure wielded the spear used to heal the wound of
Telephus at Argos, and Chiron taught him how to become the fastest
mortal. He fell in love with the Trojan princess Polyxena, which
eventually led to his demise. He refused to fight when Agamemnon took
Briseis away from him, but returned later when his friend Patroclus
was killed by Hector. For 10 points, name this Greek warrior who
became nearly invincible when his mother Thetis dipped him in the
River Styx by his heel. {As I Lay Dying} At the end of this work, one
character obtains a record player and a new set of teeth. Another
character seeking medicine for an abortion is taken advantage of by
McGowan. One character in this novel is the illegitimate son of
Reverend Whitfield, and a carpenter in this novel has cement poured on
his broken leg after a disastrous attempt to ford a river. Gillespie’s
barn is set afire by one character, and another character claims that
his mother is a fish. Cash builds a coffin for his mother in this
work. For 10 points, name this novel largely narrated by Darl
following the Bundren family, a work by William Faulkner. Persian
{Gulf War} Michel Roquejeoffre commanded Operation Daguet during this
conflict, after which the Glory Canal was built by the losing side.
The Carter Doctrine was used to justify one mission during this
incident, and the routing of the Republican Guard resulted in the
Highway of Death. Saddam Hussein launched SCUD missiles at Israel
during this conflict, in which Norman Schwarzkopf developed the plans
for Operation Desert Storm. For 10 points, name this 1991 war in which
the Iraqi forces were expelled from Kuwait by a coalition led by
George H. W. Bush. The {Social Contract}, Or Principles of Political
Right One section in this work suggests that a right must have a sense
of moral obligation, explaining that slaves only submit to their
masters because they fear physical harm, not because they feel obliged
to. It posits that monarchies work best in hot climates, and this work
distinguishes between the sovereign and the state. This work begins,
"Man is born free, and everywhere he is in chains,” and it states that
laws must be approved by the general will of the people. For 10
points, name this work of political theory by Jean- Jacques Rousseau.
{Golgi} Apparatus [accept {Golgi} Body] This structure was originally
thought to be an illusion caused by the black reaction, but its
existence was proven by an electron microscope. The GAAP protein
located in this structure protects against apoptosis, and its contents
are transferred to its lumen. The COPII protein tags vesicles from
another organelle which enter the cis face of this structure, which is
made up of stacks of flat membrane-covered sacs known as cisternae.
For 10 points, name this organelle that processes and packages
proteins and lipids to be sent throughout the cell, named for its
Italian discoverer. {T}heodore {Roosevelt} [accept {T}eddy {Roosevelt}
or {TR}; prompt on {Roosevelt}] This man prevented Germany from
gaining a foothold in Morocco at the Algeciras Conference, and he was
in office during the British bombarding of Venezuelan forts. This man
passed the Elkins Act, and he helped make a secret treaty giving Japan
permission to invade Korea. He signed the Pure Food and Drug Act, and
started the revolution that split Panama from Colombia. He added his
namesake corollary to the Monroe Doctrine and founded the Bull Moose
Party. For 10 points, name this man who commanded the Rough Riders and
succeeded William McKinley. The {Night Watch} [or The {Company of
Frans Banning Cocq}] In this painting, a dwarf-like boy holding a
large powder horn runs off to the left, while a man holding a lance
stands in the background. An old man looks down while blowing
gunpowder out of his gun, and a red musketeer reloads his rifle to the
left. A dog barks at a drummer in the lower right, and an upside-down
chicken hangs from the girdle of a golden girl. The two central
figures are highlighted by a double-spotlight, and in spite of its
title, this painting depicts a daytime scene. For 10 points, name this
painting depicting a company of soldiers by Rembrandt van Rijn. Milton
{Friedman} This man worked with Leonard Savage to theorize that the
curve of an individual’s utility function differs based on their
wealth. This man’s namesake rule advocated setting the nominal
interest at zero, and he argued that licensing doctors resulted in the
inflation of their incomes. He worked with Edmund Phelps to develop
the concept of the “natural rate of unemployment,” and he criticized
Keynesian economics during a period of stagflation, favoring
monetarism. For 10 points, name this Chicago school economist who
wrote Capitalism and Freedom. {Timur} the Lame [accept {Tamerlane} or
{Tamburlane} or {Tambor-lenk}] After the death of Amir Kazgan, this
man declared fealty to the leader who overran the chief city of
Transoxania. He was victorious at the Battle of the Terek River, and
this man besieged his brother-in-law Amir Husayn at Balkh. This man
invaded Anatolia in 1402, and supported Tokhtamysh’s invasion of
Moscow. He and his son Shah Rukh defeated the army of Bayezid at the
Battle of Ankara. He sacked the city of Delhi and built pyramids out
of skulls at Damascus. For 10 points, name this ruler from Asia who
tried to restore the Mongol Empire from his capital at Samarkand. John
{Keats} The narrator in one of this man’s poems asks a goddess to
“hear these tuneless numbers,” and exclaims, “A bright torch, and a
casement ope at night to let the warm Love in!” This author of “Ode to
Psyche” wrote about “mists and mellow fruitfulness” in “To Autumn,”
and stated that “A thing of beauty is a joy forever” in Endymion. He
addressed an “unravished bride of quietness” in a poem which states
that “Beauty is truth, truth beauty.” For 10 points, name this
Romantic poet who wrote “Ode to a Nightingale” and “Ode on a Grecian
Urn.” Michinomiya {Hirohito} [accept Emperor {Shōwa} before mentioned]
This leader launched Operation Gogo, and one assassination attempt on
this leader led to the resignation of the nation’s Prime Minister,
Count Gonnohyoe. His prime minister was shot by eleven naval officers
in the May 15 Incident, and this leader also discovered several
species of hydrozoa as a marine biologist. His reign was known as
Shōwa, or “Enlightened Peace,” and after his death, he was succeeded
by Akihito. This leader also gave the Jewel Voice Broadcast, in which
he announced his nation’s surrender after the dropping of the atomic
bombs. For 10 points, name this emperor of Japan during World War II.
Frank Lloyd {Wright} This man’s group of buildings in the Florida
Southern College is called the Child of the Sun. He designed the lily
pad columns in the Johnson Wax Headquarters, and described his Usonian
homes in An Autobiography. The Great Kanto Earthquake in Tokyo was
survived by his Imperial Hotel. This man built a three-winged summer
house in Wisconsin, and his most famous building features a stream
running through it. For 10 points, name this leader of the Prairie
School movement who designed the Robie House and Fallingwater.
{Fungus} [accept {Fungi}] Cytoplasm loss in these organisms is
mitigated by Wororin bodies which plug into septal pores. Their method
of reproduction can employ either a basidia or an ascus, and some of
these organisms employ rhizomorphs to imitate plant roots. A symbiotic
relationship between a plant and one of these organisms is called
mycorrhizae. They possess hyphae composed of chitin cell walls which
branch out to form mycelia, and some of them reproduce using spores.
For 10 points, name this kingdom that includes mushrooms. {Death in
Venice} [accept {Der Tod in Venedig}] A boatman in this novel hastily
leaves without collecting any money, supposedly because he fears
getting caught without a license. The protagonist of this novel
discovers that his luggage was sent to Como, and decides to stay at
the Hotel des Bains. He becomes sick after eating overripe
strawberries, and is disturbed by the fact that he is attracted to a
Polish boy. The title event occurs while the protagonist watches
Tadzio on an Italian beach. For 10 points, name this novel about the
demise of Gustav von Aschenbach in the title city, a work by Thomas
Mann. Book of {Revelation} [do not accept “Book of Revelations”] One
section of this book describes a wall made of jasper and decorated
with precious stones. The narrator addresses the seven churches of
Asia in the second and third chapters of this work, and a voice can be
heard saying "I am the alpha and the omega." In this book's eighth and
the ninth books, the trumpeting of an angel destroys a third of the
world. Jesus is described as the "Word of God" in this book, and it
involves the opening of the seven seals and the Whore of Babylon. For
10 points, name this book of the Bible about the apocalypse, written
by John of Patmos. {Sinai} Peninsula The Great and Small Bitter Lakes
lie to the west of this region, and Lake Bardawil lies on its northern
coast. The ancient city of Pelusium is located in this region, which
contains Mount Catherine. The Negev Desert lies to the east of this
region, and it separates the Gulf of Aqaba from the Gulf of Suez.
Saudi Arabia claims Sanafir and another island separated from this
region by the Straits of Tiran. For 10 points, name this peninsula
owned by Egypt, which shares its name with a biblical mountain.
{Lake}s Triggers such as a landslide can cause these entities to
undergo a limnic eruption, and thousands of people were asphyxiated by
carbon dioxide when one of these named Nyos. Several of them linked in
series are called paternoster, and cirques in a glacier cirques can
form a type of these called a tarn. Cutting a bend from a meandering
river will form the oxbow variety of these, and ones located on
volcanoes are the crater type. For 10 points, name these inland bodies
of water, of which a set of five “Great” ones lie on the American-
Canadian border. {Roe} v. {Wade} [accept either or both names in
either order] The Hyde Amendment made shortly after this case was
upheld in Harris v. McRae, and one party that this case was decided in
favor of was Dr. James Hallford. The Georgia case Doe v. Bolton was a
companion to this Supreme Court case. The major precedent for it was
Griswold v. Connecticut, and the majority opinion for it was written
by Harry Blackmun. The court ruled that citizens have the right to
privacy under the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, and
it supported the cause of Norma McCorvey. For 10 points, name this
1973 Supreme Court case legalizing abortion. {Vuvuzela} The largest
one of these objects is located in Cape Town and has the phrase
“Hyundai brings the gees” engraved in it. Jon Qwelane denounced these
objects, accusing them of originating “from hell,” but Sepp Blatter
defended the use of these objects. Patrice Evra blamed these objects
for waking him up at six o’clock, and Xabi Alonso condemned these
objects for being “annoying.” Lionel Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo urged
the ban of these instruments. For 10 points, name this plastic horn
which drew attention in the 2010 FIFA World Cup. The Tragedy of
{Julius Caesar} One character in this work laments, “O judgment! thou
art fled to brutish beasts, and men have lost their reason” in a
speech which also declares “The evil that men do lives after them; the
good is oft interred with their bones.” In this play, a statue with a
hundred wounds spouting blood is dreamt by Calpurnia. A character
claiming, “The fault…is in our stars, not ourselves” persuades another
to murder the title character, who is warned by a soothsayer to beware
the Ides of March. For 10 points, name this play in which Cassius and
Brutus plot the assassination of the title ruler, a tragedy by William
Shakespeare. Rene {Descartes} This man posited that a person cannot
fully trust his sense of determining reality with his “dream
argument.” He formulated an early version of the “brain in a vat”
thought experiment with his conception of the “evil demon,” and he
argued against empiricism using the example of a melting piece of wax.
He posited that the pineal gland was the intermediary between the mind
and the body, and his treatises include Discourse on Method and
Meditations on First Philosophy. For 10 points, name this French
philosopher who famously stated, “Cogito, ergo sum,” or, “I think,
therefore I am.” {“Moonlight” Sonata} [accept {Piano Sonata} No. {14}
in C-Sharp Minor]   The cadenza from this composition’s third movement
is quoted in the fourth measure of melody in Chopin’s Fantasie
Impromptu. This work’s adagio sostenuto first movement contains the
instruction for the sustain pedal to be held down continuously in its
duration, and it was dedicated to the composer’s pupil, Countess Julie
Guicciardi. This C-sharp minor piece is its composer’s fourteenth in a
genre he heavily innovated. Originally called “Quasi una fantasia,” it
was nicknamed by Ludwig Rellstab due to its evocation of Lake Lucerne
at night. For 10 points, name this piano piece by Ludwig van
Beethoven. Giuseppe {Garibaldi} This leader commanded the undefeated
Army of the Vosges, and while exiled to London, he met Lord
Palmerston. This man was victorious at the Battle of Calatafimi, and
he previously led the Hunters of the Alps. He met his first wife Anita
while fighting in the War of the Ragamuffins, and this man lost the
Battle of Mentana seven years after he won the Battle of Volturno. He
met Victor Emmanuel II at Teano, and he led the Expedition of the
Thousand with the Redshirts to defeat the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies.
For 10 points, name this Italian Revolutionary who was part of the
Risorgimento. {O. Henry} [accept William Sydney {Porter}] In one of
this man’s works, Detective Woods arrests Kernan for the murder of
Norcross, “The Clarion Call.” One story by this man sees Mr. Behrman
paint a leaf on a wall, while in another, Jimmy Valentine opens a safe
in order to save a child. This author of “A Retrieved Reformation”
wrote stories such as “The Furnished Room” in his collection The Four
Million. He wrote about two kidnappers who pay Ebenezer Dorset to take
back the title character in “The Ransom of Red Chief,” and his most
famous story features Jim and Della selling their most prized
possessions to buy Christmas gifts for each other. For 10 points, name
this author of “The Gift of the Magi.” {Buffer} Solutions A barbital
variety of these is commonly used to separate serum proteins, while a
Tris variety of these can be used as a primary standard in analytical
chemistry. Criteria for these were put forth by Norman Good, who also
compiled a list of twelve of them. Their effectiveness can be
determined by their namesake capacity, and carbonic acid and
bicarbonate in human blood are an example of one of these solutions.
Their pH can be calculated by using pKa in the Henderson-Hasselbalch
equation. For 10 points, name this type of solution which can resist
changes in pH. {Stanford Prison} Experiment [prompt on {Zimbardo
Experiment} before mention] This experiment is the subject of the
documentary Quiet Rage, and its conductor theorized about its results
in his book The Lucifer Effect. Christina Maslach objected to this
experiment, in which one of its most famous subjects acquired the
nickname “John Wayne.” Subjects’ roles in it were determined by coin
toss, and this experiment took place in Jordan Hall. Its conductor
played the role of "Superintendent," and the participants were either
“guards” or “inmates.” For 10 points, name this psychology experiment
conducted by Philip Zimbardo at a California university. {Shiva} This
deity gave a bow to King Janaka, which Rama broke when he won the hand
of Sita. He crushed the dwarf Apasmara with his right foot and yielded
a trident that represented the three gunas. He is often depicted
wearing the cobra Naga around his neck, and he swallowed the poison
Halahala to obtain his blue throat. His vehicle is the white bull
Nandi, and he is often depicted as Nataraja, the eternal dancer. His
third eye destroys everything before it. For 10 points, name this
husband of Parvati and destroyer god of the Hindu Trimurti. Gabriel
{Garcia Marquez} A work by this man opens with an examination of a
chess player who committed suicide by breathing gold-cyanide.
Popularity of the title figure of one of his works declines due to the
daughter who transforms into a tarantula. This author of “A Very Old
Man with Enormous Wings” wrote a novel in which José Arcadio starts
speaking Latin while tied to a tree. The Vicario brothers murder
Santiago Nasar in one work by this man, and another novel by this man
features the Buendia family in Macondo. For 10 points, name this
author of Chronicle of a Death Foretold and One Hundred Years of
Solitude. {U}nited {N}ations In September, this organization was the
site of a landmark meeting between President Obama and Mustafa Abdel-
Jalil, the new head-of-state of Libya. This organization was once
headed by Dag Hammarskjold, and it drew criticism for its failure to
intervene during the Rwandan genocide. One arm of this organization
was founded at the Bretton Woods conference, while another branch of
it is centered at The Hague. The Security Council gives authorization
for members to go to war, and it is currently headed by Ban Ki- moon.
For 10 points, name this organization founded to replace the League of
Nations. {Peter and the Wolf} [or {Petya i Volk}] One character in
this work scolds the title character for being in the meadow, while
another character played by the oboe avoids a cat by swimming to the
center of a lake. A flute is used to represent a character that
distracts another character by flying in circles, and the protagonist
of this work catches the antagonist with a lasso. The woodwinds
represent the hunters in this work, and a bassoon is used to represent
the grandfather of the title boy. For 10 points, name this piece in
which the French horn is used to represent the title animal, a work by
Sergei Prokofiev. Avram Noam {Chomsky} Every context-free grammar can
be translated into an equivalent one of this man’s namesake normal
forms. This author of Language and Mind and a student of Zelig Harris
put forth the Minimalist Program, and stated that the languages able
to be recognized by a Turing machine outline the Type-0 tier of his
namesake hierarchy. He championed the idea of transformational-
generative grammar and coined the phrase "colorless green ideas sleep
furiously" in his book Syntactic Structures. For 10 points, name this
MIT linguist. {Shutter Island} One character in this film is
introduced while Mahler’s Piano Quartet in A Minor is playing and
comments on another character’s “excellent defense mechanisms”. The
dialogue in this film includes the recurring question, “Why are you
all wet, baby?”. This film’s protagonist reveals that he is searching
for his wife’s murderer, the arsonist Andrew Laeddis, while
investigating the disappearance of Rachel Solando, who supposedly
drowned her three children. For 10 points, name this 2010 Martin
Scorsese film in which Leonardo DiCaprio plays a delusional patient at
the title institution. {Mitosis} Colchicine and taxol stop this
process by interfering with tubulin polymerization. It is promoted by
cyclins, and SMC proteins play a pivotal role in the first half of
this process. The nucleolus disappears during one step of this
process, and spindle fibers attach to kinetochores located on the
centromeres during another step. The G2 phase precedes this process,
and cytokinesis follows it. Bacteria perform binary fission instead of
undergoing this process. For 10 points, name this process in the cell
cycle during which one cell forms two daughter cells. Second
Anglo-{Boer} War [do not accept “First Boer War”] One slogan during
this war was “remember Majuba Hill”. The Battle of Colenso occurred
during Black Week before Lord Roberts took command, and the later
founder of the Boy Scouts, Robert Baden-Powell, defended Mafeking
during this war. The Jameson Raid helped lead to this war, and Lord
Kitchener used a scorched earth policy to combat the guerrila warfare
of Generals Jan Smuts and Louis Botha. Ending the independence of the
Transvaal and the Orange Free State, For 10 points, name this war
between the namesake farmers of Dutch descent and the British in South
Africa. “{Dover Beach}” The narrator of this poem states that the
world “seems to lie before us like a land of dreams” and has “neither
joy, nor love, nor light.” The speaker of this poem tells its reader
to “Come to the window” because “sweet is the night-air,” and notes
that “the moon lies fair.” He states that he could only hear the
“melancholy, long, withdrawing roar,” but recalls that “Sophocles long
ago / heard it on the Aegean.” Beginning with the line “the sea is
calm tonight,” For 10 points, name this poem in which “ignorant armies
clash by night,” a work by Matthew Arnold. The {Communist Manifesto}
[accept {Manifest der Kommunistischen Partei} or {Manifesto of the
Communist Party}] This work calls for the abolition of cities through
an equal distribution of population throughout a country. It also
proposes free public education and banning child labor, and claims
that a revolution in Germany is nigh. It calls for the forcible
overthrow of existing social conditions, and it explains history in
terms of class warfare. For 10 points, name this work that details the
problems of capitalism and ends with the phrase “Workers of the world
unite!”, by Friedrich Engels and Karl Marx. {Tree}s [prompt on
{Graph}s or {Network}s] Lamport signatures are stored in one variety
of this data structure, and another variety of this structure is self-
balancing and is called red-black. They come in hash and ordered
varieties, and the number of nodes in a complete binary one is equal
to one less than two raised to the quantity h plus 1, where h is the
height of it. A complete one has all ends equidistant from the origin,
and a free one lacks a first node. They have a root node which is the
parent or ancestor of all subsequent nodes. For 10 points, identify
this data structure consisting of branches that terminate at leaves.
Francis Scott Key {Fitzgerald} In one novel by this author, Eleanor
Savage sends her horse charging off a cliff, ending her relationship
with Amory Blaine. One character by this author is shocked to learn
that books are real, and this author wrote a novel about the
relationship between Gloria and Anthony Patch. Another of his
characters claims to have fixed the 1919 World Series, and this author
of This Side of Paradise and The Beautiful and Damned wrote a novel in
which the title character is shot by George Wilson and given a funeral
by Nick Carraway. For 10 points, name this American author of The
Great Gatsby. {Alps} The High Tauern is a subset of the central part
of this mountain range, and the Greywacke zone separates the two
eastern subsets of it. The Jura Mountains lie to the north of it, and
the Brenner Pass is the lowest pass through this range. The Fréjus
Road Tunnel and Fréjus Rail Tunnel connect two countries spanned by
this range. The St. Bernard Pass goes through this mountain range
between Monte Rosa and Mont Blanc. For 10 points, name this European
mountain range containing Lake Geneva and Matterhorn. William Jennings
{Bryan} This politician emphasized religion as the basis of morality
in his lecture “The Prince of Peace.” He founded the Progressive
newspaper The Commoner, and he resigned as Secretary of State
following Woodrow Wilson’s handling of the Lusitania affair. This
politician was famously cross-examined in court by Clarence Darrow,
and although he ended up losing to William McKinley, he received the
Democratic presidential nomination in 1896 after giving a speech
espousing bimetallism. For 10 points, name this populist from Nebraska
who participated in the Scopes trial and delivered the “Cross of Gold”
speech. {Demeter} [accept {Ceres} before “Poseidon”] This goddess
turned Ascalabus in to a lizard when he mocked her for drinking an
entire vessel of water. This goddess hid among the horses of King
Onkios when fleeing from Poseidon, and advised Psyche to go beg
Aphrodite for forgiveness. King Eleusis asked her to nurse his two
sons, and she was interrupted by Metanira when turning Demophon
immortal. She accidentally ate the shoulder of Pelops. For 10 points,
name this Greek goddess of grain and harvest, the mother of
Persephone. {Nighthawks} In this painting, a man holds an unlit
cigarette between his fingers, and several windows with green blinds
can be seen on a building. A yellow door without a doorknob appears on
the right side of this work, and the entrance to the central building
cannot be found. A person in white clothing stands behind a triangular
counter, and an advertisement for Phillies cigars appears on the top
of the central building. A woman wearing a red dress sits next to a
man in a suit. For 10 points, names this depiction of an empty street
and a bar, a work of Edward Hopper. {Crime and Punishment} [accept
{Pryestupleniye i nakazaniye}] A group of spectators believe that the
protagonist of this novel is crazy when he kneels on the ground and
starts kissing it. One character in this novel asks the protagonist if
he recalls seeing two workers painting a building, and Svidrigailov
threatens to use the secret he overheard against the protagonist.
Dunya marries Razumihin instead of the greedy Luzhin, and near the end
of this novel, Sonya encourages the protagonist to confess his murder
of Lizaveta and the pawnbroker Alyona. For 10 points, name this novel
about Raskolnikov, a novel by Fyodor Dostoyevsky. St. {Augustine} of
Hippo This man’s namesake hypothesis concerns the chronological
ordering of the Gospels of the New Testament. He wrote a text dealing
with rhetoric and its religious uses in On Christian Doctrine, and
argued against Donatism. He distinguished the difference between the
“visible” and “invisible” churches, and he was inspired by the
Visigoths’ sack of Rome to write one of his works. In his most famous
work, he described his experience as an adherent of Manichaeism. For
10 points, name this man who wrote The City of God and Confessions, a
bishop from Hippo. {Glorious Revolution} [accept {Revolution of 1688};
accept {Bloodless Revolution} before “bloodless”] During this event,
Patrick Sarsfield was defeated at the Battle of Reading. Ignatius
White unsuccessfully tried to convince France to intervene, and it
began after The Seven Bishops were tried for seditious libel. Forces
financed in part by Pope Innocent IX landed at Brixham during this
event, and the Dominion of New England collapsed shortly after. The
Declaration of Indulgence was issued a year before this event, which
saw the fall of the Stuart line. For 10 points, name this almost
bloodless event which saw James II overthrown by a Dutch invasion of
William of Orange and Mary II. {Shaka} Zulu [accept {Shaka}
Senzangakhona] This leader defeated Zwide at the Battle of Gqokli
Hill. He preferred fighting with the iklwa over the assegai, and he
nearly starved his own subjects to death when his mother Nandi died.
Mfecane resulted when the tribes nearby attempted to escape this man’s
forces, and he was assassinated by his brother Dingane. He famously
pioneered the “buffalo horns” formation. For 10 points, name this man
who united the Northern Nguni people, a brutal founder of the Zulu
Kingdom. Gian Lorenzo {Bernini} This man created the staircase
entrance to the Vatican Palace known as Scala Regia. He created the
two marble figures below the tomb of Urban VIII, and his works in the
Borghese Gallery include a depiction of a hero carrying his father
fleeing from Troy. One of his works shows a god and a nymph turning
into a tree, and he also sculpted a man in the process of firing a
sling. In addition to Apollo and Daphne and David, he sculpted a work
located in the Cornaro Chapel which shows an angel ravishing a woman
with an arrow. For 10 points, name this Italian sculptor who created
The Ecstasy of Saint Teresa. Commonwealth of {Australia} In one novel
from this country, Mrs. Ruth Godbold and her children watch the
destruction of Xanadu, a house previously owned by Miss Hare. That
novel is Riders in the Chariot. One author from this country described
the murder of the Healy and Newby families in The Chant of Jimmie
Blacksmith. One author from this country wrote about Laura Trevelyan
and the title German explorer’s attempt to cross an entire continent
in Voss, and another author from this country wrote about a bet
centered on transporting a glass cathedral in Oscar and Lucinda. For
10 points, name this country home to Thomas Keneally, Patrick White,
and Peter Carey. {Rosh Hashanah} [accept {Yom} Ha{Zikaron} or {Yom}
Ha-{Din}; accept {Yom T’ruah} before “T’ruah”] This holiday occurs on
the day before the Fast of Gedaliah, and it is believed to be the day
on which God inscribes one’s fate into the Book of Life. Its observers
metaphorically cast off their sins into a body of water in a ritual
known as tashlikh. Apples dipped in honey are consumed during this
holiday, which begins the Days of Awe. A ram’s horn called the shofar
is blown to satisfy the commandment of making T’ruah, and it
incorporates the greeting “shana tova.” For 10 points, name this
holiday occurring at the beginning of Tishrei, the Jewish New Year.
{Chicago} The largest convention center in the U.S. is located in this
city, and the Canal Street railroad bridge lies on its namesake river.
That river’s branches converge to form the Main Stem at Wolf Point,
and the tomb of Stephen Douglas is located in this city. The
neighborhood of Streeterville contains its Navy Pier, and the Lake
Point Tower is located east of its Lake Shore Drive. Its Orange Line
connects Midway Airport with “the Loop,” and it holds the tallest
building in the U.S. For 10 points, name this home of the Willis
Tower, the largest city in Illinois. Battle of {Trafalgar} Before this
battle, the officer who recaptured the island fort of Diamond Rock
retreated to Cadiz, believing a false report that an enemy was
residing in the Bay of Biscay. The Redoutable and the Bucentaure were
captured during this battle, in which Cuthbert Collingwood managed to
maneuver a squadron behind the fleet of Pierre de Villeneuve. The
victorious commander of this battle signaled “England expects that
every man will do his duty” before being shot by a sniper. For 10
points, name this 1805 naval battle in which Horatio Nelson won a
major victory in the Napoleonic Wars. Antoine-Laurent {Lavoisier} This
scientist theorized that solids combine with “caloric” to form
liquids, and he also showed respiration to be a type of combustion. He
theorized that all acids must contain oxygen, and his research showed
that weight changes during combustion arise from mixing with oxygen,
disproving the phlogiston theory. This author of Elementary Treatise
on Chemistry also named the element hydrogen. For 10 points, name this
French scientist who developed the law of conservation of mass, often
considered the father of modern chemistry. Taio {Cruz} [accept Jacob
Taio {Cruz}] This artist recorded a song for the movie Rio called
“Telling the World”, and another of his songs was released in two
versions featuring either Kylie Minogue or Travie McCoy. That song,
“Higher”, was included in his first album Rokstarr, and in another of
his songs, he sings that “I throw my hands up in the air sometimes”.
In one of his songs, Ludacris declares that “I may not be the worst or
the best but you gotta respect my honesty,” and the singer warns in
the chorus that “if you fall for me, I’m not easy to please”. For 10
points, name this British singer whose hits have included “Dynamite”
and “Break Your Heart”. Nathaniel {Hawthorne} One short story by this
author sees the title character halt a procession led by Edmund
Andros, and in another, a small orange lizard distorts itself to
death. This author of “The Gray Champion” wrote about four old men who
travel to Florida in search of the Fountain of Youth in “Dr.
Heidegger’s Experiment”. He also wrote a short story in which Goodman
finds his wife Faith at a witches’ Sabbath. In his most famous novel,
Arthur Dimmesdale fathers Pearl with Hester Prynne. For 10 points,
name this American author of The Scarlet Letter. The {Prince} [accept
Il {Principe}] This work suggests that it is better to give citizens
weapons freely rather than forcibly confiscate them. It asserts that
it is better for one to have barons than servants, and mercenaries are
declared to be both useless and disloyal in this work. This book warns
against flatterers, and it personifies fortune as a woman that must be
controlled. It praises Cesare Borgia and also advises rulers to be
both a fox and a lion. This work declares that it is better to be
feared than loved. For 10 points, name this political treatise written
for one of the Medicis by Niccolo Machiavelli. {Don Giovanni} The
title figure in this work manages to escape from angry pursuers
shortly after “Protegga il giusto cielo” is played. The aria “Il mio
tesoro” is sung by Ottavio in this opera, and the bass aria “Madamina,
il catalogo e questo” is sung in an attempt to console a revengeful
character. The victims in this opera include Zerlina and Donna Elvira,
and the title figure escapes with his servant Leporello after a
murder. The statue of the Commendatore drags the title figure to hell
in its final scene. For 10 points, name this opera about a seducer by
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. {Six Characters in Search of an Author}
[accept {Sei personaggi in cerca d'autore}] One character in this work
asserts that acting is a profession for madmen, and that character
sends away his wife when she falls in love with a clerk. That wife,
Amalia, returns to the town after the death of the clerk, and finds
work as a seamstress. Amalia’s daughter works as a prostitute in this
work, and is discovered by Amalia’s former husband when he visits
Madame Pace’s shop. In its last scene, The Child drowns in a fountain,
and The Boy shoots himself in the head. For 10 points, name this play
in which The Father, The Mother, and four other characters seek a
creator, a work by Luigi Pirandello. Robert Edward {Lee} This man was
defeated at the Battle of Cheat Mountain, and he later fought against
Winfield Hancock at the Second Battle of Deep Bottom. This man found a
trail which would lead the Americans to victory at the Battle of Cerro
Gordo, and he was given field command when Joseph Johnston was wounded
at the Battle of Seven Pines. One of his officers lost a copy of his
battle plan before the Battle of Antietam, and he suppressed an
attempted revolt led by John Brown at Harper's Ferry. For 10 points,
name this Confederate general who surrendered to Ulysses S. Grant at
Appomattox Courthouse. {R}ed {B}lood {C}ells [accept {Erythrocyte}s] A
precursor stage to the formation of these cells is the creation of a
normoblast, and they express the CD47 marker to protect themselves
from phagocytosis. The Coombs test is used to detect antibodies on the
surface of these cells, and immature ones are known as reticulocytes.
Excessive production of them is known as polycythemia, and they form
in the bone marrow and are destroyed in the spleen. These biconcave
cells lack nuclei, though they become distorted in people with sickle
cell anemia. For 10 points, identify these cells that deliver oxygen
via the circulatory system. {Gestalt} Psychology One member of this
school of thought used a box of thumbtacks, a box of matches, and a
candle to examine the concept of functional fixedness and was named
Karl Duncker. Another member of this school who posited the Field
Theory was named Kurt Lewis, and a Necker Cube is used as an example
to illustrate its concept of multistability. It theorized that all
cognitive experiences are organized in the simplest forms in the law
of pragnanz. For 10 points, name this holistic school of psychology
led by Wolfgang Kohler and Max Wertheimer centered in Berlin. {Thor}
In one story, this figure engages in an insult exchange with the
ferryman Harbarth. He killed a certain giant after that giant almost
finished building Asgard, and he recovered his favorite weapon from
Thrym by disguising himself as Freya. This deity failed to empty a
drinking horn connected to the sea, and at Ragnarok, he will kill the
Midgard Serpent. His most precious possessions are a pair of iron
gloves, a belt of strength, and a hammer. For 10 points, name this
thunder god of Norse mythology. David {Cameron} This man once served
as a Special Adviser to Norman Lamont. He generated controversy when
it was revealed that his communications director Andy Coulson had
engaged in phone hacking as a news editor, and he has recently faced
criticism for his policy regarding the European Union. He succeeded
Michael Howard as the head of his party, and is currently the MP for
Witney. Upon forming a coalition government with Nick Clegg and the
Liberal Democrats, he assumed his current office after the resignation
of Gordon Brown. For 10 points, name this Conservative and current
Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. Joseph Rudyard {Kipling} This
author wrote about the triumph of proverbs in his work The Gods of the
Copybook Headings. In one poem, he states that the hyenas “know that
the dead are safer meat,” and in another, a soldier is hanged for
shooting a sleeping comrade. This author of “Danny Deever” wrote a
story in which Daniel Dravot and Peachey Carnehan take over the throne
of Kafiristan. The narrator of one of his poems tells a water carrier
that he is “a better man than I am,” and he created such characters as
Shere Khan, Baloo, and Mowgli. For 10 points, name this British author
of The Jungle Book. Jackson {Pollock} One work by this man depicts a
red bird drinking out of a bowl, which is titled Man Bull Bird.
Another work by this man depicts two carriages and five horses
performing the title action, while another shows an outline of the
title animal using red arrows. This artist of Going West and The She-
Wolf depicted an incomprehensible mix of black, white, and purple in
his Lavender Mist. His No. 5 is currently the most expensive painting
in the world. For 10 points, name this artist known for his style of
abstract expressionism known as “action painting.” The {Canterbury
Tales} [accept “The {Squire’s Tale}” before “rape”] In one part of
this work, Canacee is given a brass horse, a mirror, and a ring that
allows her to understand birds. In another part of this work, a knight
guilty of rape goes on a quest to learn that what women desire most is
power. Other stories in this collection include one in which Nicholas
is branded on the bottom by Absalon after seducing Alison, and one in
which Palamon and Arcite battle for the hand of Emily. Narrators in
this work include the Knight, the Wife of Bath, and the Miller. For 10
points, name this collection of stories told by a group of pilgrims, a
work of Geoffrey Chaucer. {Kinetic Energy} [prompt on {Energy}] One
representation of this quantity is equal to the momentum squared over
two times mass, and it is represented in the Lagrangian with a capital
T. The equipartition theorem dictates that for molecules in an ideal
gas, this quantity is equal to three-halves times the Boltzmann
constant times temperature. The change in this quantity is equal to
power times time, and inelastic collisions do not conserve this
quantity. For 10 points, name this quantity defined as one-half times
the mass times velocity squared, the energy possessed by objects in
motion. Abraham {Maslow} This author of Eupsychian Management had one
of his works expanded into the ERG theory by Clayton Alderfer, and he
listed ten characteristics of a healthy individual, which included
criteria such as “ability to love and be loved,” and “more openness to
experience.” This thinker called moments of intense happiness “peak
experiences”. He rejected determinism in his Motivation and Human
Personality, and he examined Einstein and Jane Addams to develop his
most famous theory that places safety and esteem below self-
actualization. For 10 points, name this humanistic psychologist who
developed a hierarchy of needs. Jose Francisco de {San Martin} This
man fought under Beresford during the Battle of Albuera, and against
the Portuguese during the War of the Oranges.  This man was appointed
governor of Cuyo, and replaced Manuel Belgrano as general of the Army
of the North.  He crossed the Andes with Bernardo O’Higgins to defeat
Osario at the Battle of Maipu, which led to the complete independence
of Chile. At the Battle of Chacabuco, this man crushed the royalist
forces, and he met Simon Bolivar at the Guayaquil Conference. For 10
points, name this Argentinian revolutionary. {Titanic} One character
in this film exclaims, “I’m through being polite!” when she demands
that an elevator operator obey her. That character leaves a handprint
on a foggy window while making love in the backseat of a car. In this
film, the members of a string ensemble return one by one to join a
violinist playing to calm a frantic crowd, and this film opens with
Brock Lovett finding a drawing in a safe. Cal gives his fiancée The
Heart of the Ocean in this film, which stars Kate Winslet and Leonardo
DiCaprio as Rose and Jack. For 10 points, name this 1997 James Cameron
film about the sinking of the title ship. {Algae} [do not accept
“cyanobacteria”] Glaucophytes are microscopic varieties of these
organisms, and a lichen is composed of a fungus and one of them. They
are the only type of organism that contains chlorophyll C, which
allows them to undergo photosynthesis despite not being plants.
Cyanobacteria are sometimes referred to as the “blue-green” type of
these organisms, and a red tide is an example of one of their namesake
blooms during which they rapidly proliferate. For 10 points, name this
class of aquatic protists that includes chlorophyta, dinoflagellata,
and diatoms. {Attila} the Hun This man’s invasion of the Sassanid
Empire ended with a defeat in Armenia. This son of Mundzuk defeated
Arnegisclus at the Battle of the Utus, and he turned away from Rome
after negotiating with Pope Leo the Great. This man sacked the city of
Margus and Singidunum, and fought against the Franks, Visigoths, and
the Romans at the Battle of Chalons. He became the sole ruler after
the death of his brother Bleda, and he was known as the “Scourge of
God”. For 10 points, name this leader of the Huns. {For Whom the Bell
Tolls} One character in this work parodies Gertrude Stein by saying,
“A rose is a rose is an onion.” Agustin almost kills a hill bandit for
calling him a Negro, and Primitivo urges the protagonist to aid El
Sordo during a battle. The elderly Anselmo is tasked to kill the
Fascist sentry, and the protagonist of this novel is urged by Pilar to
begin a relationship with Maria. Pablo steals the detonators in this
work, but the protagonist uses grenades to blow up the bridge. For 10
points, name this novel set during the Spanish Civil War following
Robert Jordan, a work of Ernest Hemingway. {Ramayana} In this work,
Sugreeva becomes king after his brother is killed. One character keeps
his brother’s sandals on his throne, and Manthara convinces someone in
this work to use a promise she was given as a way to make her son the
king. Kaikeyi persuades Dasaratha to exile his first-born son in this
work, and Bharata attempts afterwards to refuse the crown. Hanuman
tells Sita that her husband will rescue her after she is kidnapped by
a demon and imprisoned on Lanka. For 10 points, name this Sanskrit
epic in which the title hero defeats Ravana. {Great Barrier Reef} The
northern end of this feature is located near Cape York Peninsula by
the Torres Strait. The Dunk Island is located in this feature, and the
Willis and Coringa Islands lie to the east of it. The Whitsunday
Islands are popular tourist destinations near this feature, in which
the Lizard Island National Park is located. Cities such as Ayr,
Cairns, and Mackay are located near this feature. For 10 points, name
this large organic formation located in the Coral Sea off the coast of
Queensland, the largest reef system in the world. {Sort}ing Algorithms
A fixed gap “h” is used in one variation of this operation, which
improves upon a simpler version in which “h” would always equal one. A
variation of this operation that can compare least significant digits
is called the radix type, and another type of this process randomly
places elements and checks if they are correct. One type of this
operation uses a pivot to flip elements larger or smaller than the
pivot, and notable types of this operation include the “bubble” and
“quick” varieties. For 10 points, name this operation which puts
elements of a list in order. {Raven}s [accept {Crow}s until mentioned;
prompt on {Bird}s] One legend holds that one of these animals brought
light into darkness by causing the seagull to drop its box of light.
The Celtic goddess Morrigan was accompanied by three of these animals,
and Apollo used one of these to spy on his lover Coronis. Legend
states that a terrible disaster will befall England if these animals
are not present at the Tower of London, and Odin owned a pair of these
animals that whispered news into his ears, Huginn and Muninn. For 10
points, name these animals often believed to be the same as crows.
Henrik {Ibsen} In one work by this author, Bernick confesses to the
townspeople that Johan did not steal his mother’s fortune. This author
of The Pillars of Society wrote a work in which an avalanche buries
the sculptor Arnold Rubek, as well as a work in which Dr. Stockmann
discovers that there is contaminated water in the town baths. This
author of When We Dead Awaken and An Enemy of the People created a
character who tells Eilert Lovborg to commit suicide, as well as a
character that walks out on her children and her husband Torvald. For
10 points, names this Norwegian playwright who created Nora Helmer and
wrote Hedda Gabler and A Doll’s House. {Teapot Dome} Scandal The
planning of this event occurred at the Little Green House on K Street,
and this event resulted in the resignation of Edwin Denby. This event
led to the McGrain v. Daughtery decision by the Supreme Court, and
John Kendrick was the first to call for an investigation of it. Robert
La Follette led that investigation, which revealed that the properties
at Elk Hills were leased to Edward Doheny. Harry Sinclair bribed the
Secretary of the Interior Albert Fall in, For 10 points, what scandal
during the Harding administration, concerning a Wyoming oil reserve?
{Ninth Symphony} [accept {Symphony No. 9}] One composition of this
type and number quotes the fourth song of Kindertotenlieder. That
work’s third movement is an A minor Rondo-Burleske. In addition to
that work of this type and number composed after The Song of the Earth
by Mahler, another composition of this type and number known as the
“Great C Major” was composed by Schubert. Another work of this type
and number includes the lyrics “Freude, schöner Götterfunken” taken
from a Friedrich Schiller poem. For 10 points, name this type of
composition and number exemplified by Beethoven’s “Choral” one, whose
last movement features a setting of “Ode to Joy.” Chinua {Achebe}
[accept Albert Chinualumogu {Achebe}] This author described a sacred
ancestral footpath fenced off by Michael Obi in his short story “Dead
Men’s Path.” One of his works deals with Odili and the title
politician, Chief Nanga, while the Feast of the New Yam is not
performed by Ezeulu in his novel Arrow of God. His most famous work
sees the protagonist violate the Week of Peace by beating his wife;
that character later participates in the execution of Ikemefuna. For
10 points, name this Nigerian author who wrote about Okonkwo in Things
Fall Apart. Paul-Michel {Foucault} This man argued that medical
treatment of the insane is only an attempt to repress challenges
against conventional morality. This author of The History of Madness
described the use of the “medical gaze” by doctors to subtract
patients’ humanities from their bodies. In another work, this author
of The Birth of the Clinic analyzed the transition from torture to the
use of institutions idealized by Jeremy Bentham’s panopticon to
contain criminals. For 10 points, name this twentieth-century French
thinker who wrote Discipline and Punish. Battle of {Thermopylae} The
winning side in this battle went on to sack Plataea and Thespiae, and
Hydarnes commanded the Immortals in this battle. When asked to put
down his weapons, one leader in this battle replied “Come and get
them,” and this battle occurred simultaneously with the Battle of
Artemisium. The traitor Ephialtes revealed a narrow mountain path to
the invaders, and the losing force at this battle was eventually
surrounded on a hill and mowed down by arrows. For 10 points, name
this 480 B.C.E. battle in which Leonidas of Sparta was defeated by
Xerxes I. Marshal {Tito} accept Josip {Broz} before mentioned |  This
man, originally a locksmith, fought on the Russian front in World War
I. He was taken as a POW, where he was exposed to Communist
propaganda, eventually joining the Red Guard in Siberia. In his native
country, Josip Broz took a pseudonym after he lost his job and was
later jailed because of his Communist views. During World War II, he
led the Partisans in recapturing his native land from the Axis powers,
and subsequently became a Communist dictator. FTP, name this Yugoslav
who defied Stalin and was not aligned with either superpower.
| {Cephalization} |  It is hypothesized that this process is an
adaptation for a predatory lifestyle. It is primarily seen in
bilaterally symmetrical animals; however, some radially symmetrical
animals such as hydras have a primitive form of it. It is present in
planarians as two nodes located at the front of a ladder shaped
system. Some echinoderms exhibit it in the larval stage, while the sea
cucumber retains it as an adult. FTP, name this evolutionary process
in which sense organs and a central nervous system concentrate in the
head of an animal.          | {Sacco-Vanzetti} or {The State V.
}Nicola {Sacco} {and} Bartolomeo {Vanzetti} accept equivalents |  The
contemporary governor, Alvan Fuller, appointed a three-man review of
the case, but refused to grant clemency. More than fifty years later,
governor Michael Dukakis proclaimed the injustice of this trial. The
result of the trial, where both men were found guilty despite one
having an alibi supported by a number of immigrants, led to widespread
protests around the world. FTP, name this Massachusetts court case,
which, was set around the murder of two paymasters and named after the
two accused.          | {Macondo} |  The almond trees planted at the
center of this town survived until its destruction, and one was used
to hang the Wandering Jew. It was built on the bank of a clear, cold
river with prehistoric, round, white stones, and according to its
founder’s dream, its houses had mirror walls. The founders left
Riohacha (Ree-o-AAH-cha) and crossed the mountains, building the town
in the middle of the swamp. Much later, it rained there for four
years, eleven months, and two days, which drove the banana companies
out. FTP, name this town, destroyed in a whirlwind, the setting of
Leaf Storm and One Hundred Years of Solitude.          | {Porgy and
Bess} |  The lead and namesake female character of this opera is left
by one man, cared for and protected by the next, pursued by a third,
fought over by the first two, leading to the initial man’s death,
lured into accompanying the third man to New York, and followed by the
namesake male lead to rescue her. An aria in this work is
“Summertime.” FTP, name this folk opera by George Gershwin about a
physically disabled man and the woman he loves in the town of Catfish
Row, South Carolina.          | David Herbert {Lawrence} |  One work
of this man is Odor of Chrysanthemums and another details the lives of
Gertrude and Paul Morel. One novel criticized in the Artemis Fowl
series was banned as pornographic. This man notably married the sister
of the Red Baron. His first novel was The White Peacock, and other
works include one expressing his idea of a superman, Kangaroo, and one
with Aztec themes, The Plumed Serpent. FTP, name this author of Women
in Love, Sons and Lovers and Lady Chatterley’s Lover.          | The
{Raft of the Medusa} |  This painting symbolically portrays the
ignoring of the lower class by the Bourbon Restoration government. It
depicts a thrown together-vessel on a pessimistic sea voyage. Most of
the figures portrayed appear to be merely focused on surviving, with
many lying down. Some however, are waving their shirts to attract the
attention of a tiny ship in the background. Name this lithograph,
which, FTP, was an early military masterpiece painted about the
aftermath of a French naval shipwreck by Théodore Géricault.
| {Lawrence v. Texas} prompt on Lawrence |  In dissent, Clarence
Thomas quoted Potter Stewart in referring to the Texas law in question
as “uncommonly silly,” but nevertheless agreed with Justices Scalia
and Rehnquist that it was not unconstitutional and ought not be struck
down. The majority, headed by Anthony Kennedy, disagreed, and in doing
so overruled the 1986 case Bowers v. Hardwick, which dealt with almost
the exact same question. FTP, name this landmark 2003 Supreme court
decision which invalidated 14 state’s existing laws against the
practice of sodomy.          | {Concave} |  If a function f is of this
type, Jensen’s (YEN-sens) inequality states that in measure theory the
Lebesgue (luh-BEG) integral over f of some other function g is less
than or equal to f of the integral over g. A simpler version of the
inequality states that a secant drawn in a function of this type
always lies below the graph of the function. A lens of this type can
be used to treat myopia, and symmetric double lenses of this type will
always make upright virtual images with smaller size. FTP, name this
term that describes polygons with at least one angle greater than 180
degrees.          | George-Jacques {Danton} |  A play by Georg Büchner
feature this revolutionary’s last days, including his famous quote
“Let me be led to death, I shall sleep in glory.” He was put to death
in 1794 after he defended Fabre d’Églantine from the “Terror,” despite
his title as the 1st President of the Committee of Public Safety. FTP,
name this French man who is often noted as the one who destroyed the
French Monarchy and replaced it with democracy.          |
{Hydrofluoric} Acid |  Burns produced by this chemical on the fingers
typically occur beneath the nails, since the chemical moves through
them without harming them but destroys the pulp underneath. Most burns
created by it show little skin damage, since it attacks lower tissues
of the skin, however, they are generally very painful. The anions
released when this compound dissociates form insoluble salts with
magnesium and calcium, causing the drug Calcium Gluconate to be
particularly useful in treating it. Its uses include the etching of
glass, as well as in cleaning equipment. FTP, identify this extremely
powerful inorganic acid which experiences hydrogen bonding.          |
Herman {Melville} |  After his father, depicted in Oliver Wendell
Holmes’s poem The Last Leaf, died, his mother added an “e” to the end
of his surname to produce its current spelling. One of this man’s
early works is Redburn: His First Voyage based on his own travels and
a posthumously published work tells the story of an unfortunate
sailor. His most famous work, dedicated to Nathaniel Hawthorne, is
based on his time on the Acushnet while sailing to the South Pacific.
His Piazza Tales include Bartleby the Scrivner. FTP, name this author
of Billy Budd and Moby Dick.          | {System of a Down} Prompt on
System |  They sing about terra cotta pies in Vicinity of Obscenity on
their most recent CD, a work that ends with the track Soldier Side,
which is titled similarly to the opening of their previous work. The
group references Tiananmen Square in the title track of one CD, and
they gained public acclaim after the previous album’s anti-war single,
Bring Your Own Bombs. FTP, name this Armenian popular metal band with
recent CDs Mesmerize and Hypnotize.          | Christoph Willibald
{Gluck} |  This German composer worked primarily with opera, a form he
innovated by making the overture directly related to the drama which
followed. He rejected the complex, virtuosic arias which dominated the
Italian opera seria and sought to restore it to its original
simplicity and beauty. One of his theories was that the words sung
were as important as the notes sung. Hailing from the classical
period, he was a great influence on Mozart. Orpheus and Eurydice is
his most famous opera and one of his few still performed today. FTP,
name this composer of the "reform" operas.          | {Democritus} |
Though Aristotle and Plato largely discredited this man’s work, men
such as Epicurus and Lucretius found truth in this “Laughing
Philosopher’s” ideas. Comparatively little remains of his Small World
Systems and Little Cosmology, but the critiques of his work on the
“void” and his most recognized theory, which was later confirmed with
John Dalton’s early nineteenth century discoveries, survive. FTP, name
this student of Leucippus, the Greek philosopher partly credited with
the creation of the atomic theory.          | {Positron} |  This
particle was first predicted by Paul Dirac in 1928, but was not
discovered until Carl Anderson found that when he took photographs of
the trajectories of certain particles in a fog tracking chamber in a
magnetic field, the photographs showed a particle which deviated
toward the opposite magnetic pole from an electron but was otherwise
identical. This particle is given off with a neutrino in a namesake
type of nuclear decay, and when it meets an electron, they are both
annihilated and two photons are emitted. FTP, name this particle which
is essentially an electron with a positive charge.          | {Ozark}
Plateau |  This plateau contains such lakes as Table Rock, Stockton,
Beaver, and Bull Shoals. Towns in it include Springfield, Joplin, and
Fayetteville. The highest peak in it is Taum Sauk Mt., a member of the
St. Francois Mts. in its eastern section, at less than 2,000 ft. To
its south are the Boston and Ouachita Mountains. The White River runs
in its southern part, and the Osage River runs near its northern
boundary. FTP, name this hilly plateau in Missouri and northern
Arkansas.          | The {Y}oung {M}en’s {C}hristian {A}ssociation |
A variation of this organization, for cavemen, appeared on an episode
of the Flinstones when Barney lets some kids swim in his pool. The
first one in the United States opened in 1851, which opened one month
after one opened in Montreal. The original ones were run by
volunteers, but in the 1880s, this organization decided it needed full
time employees, though it is still a non- profit organization. FTP,
name this organization, which is the namesake of a popular song by The
Village People where participants make letters above their heads with
their hands.          | {Lolita} |  Although this novel’s foreword is
penned by John Ray, its protagonist writes the bulk of the work, also
known as The Confession of a White Widowed Male, as a testimonial for
the jury that is set to convict him for the murder of Clare Quilty.
The protagonist had encountered Quilty while on a cross-country road
trip with his deceased wife’s twelve-year-old daughter, who had become
his lover shortly after her mother’s death. The nickname of this young
girl, whose real name was Dolores Haze, was given to her by the
protagonist, her stepfather, Humbert Humbert. FTP, name this novel by
Vladimir Nabokov.          | {Utopia} |  The title location of this
work has been seen by Raphael Hythloday, who believes it to be far
superior to his own society. Despite its being founded by a general,
the nation is peaceful. Three characters in this work correspond to
real people, Peter Giles, Cardinal John Morton, and the author,
although their characteristics are not the same. The titular island
began as an isthmus and was deliberately made into an island through
public works. FTP, name this novel about an ideal society whose name
means “nowhere” by Thomas More.          | Republic of {Chile} |  This
country shares the General Carrera lake with its neighbor to its east,
although the latter uses a different name. Its Chonos Archipelago is
the northernmost group of a string of islands at its southern end,
including the large Isla Wellington. At its northern end, the
Cordillera Domeyko and the Coastal Ranges surround the Loa River basin
and the Atacama Desert. FTP, name this country whose major cities
include Concepción, Valparaíso, and Santiago, and which borders
Argentina to the east.      ---|---          | {Native Son} |  In the
beginning of this novel the protagonist kills a rat with a skillet.
After attacking a member of his gang to avoid having to rob a white
man’s store, he takes a job as a chauffeur for his landlord’s family.
While driving the landlord’s daughter and her communist boyfriend, all
three get drunk. The protagonist is forced to help the landlord’s
daughter, Mary, reach her room and accidentally smothers her while
trying to keep her from revealing his presence to her blind mother.
His girlfriend Bessie, whom he later kills, encourages him in his plan
to frame Mary’s boyfriend, Jan. FTP, name this work in which the legal
help Jan provides Bigger Thomas helps him finally feel equal to
whites, a novel by Richard Wright.          | {Clue} accept {Cluedo}
before “Mr. Boddy” |  This game was invented in 1944 by Anthony Pratt
after he and his wife moved to the southern coast of England. It was
first marketed in Great Britain in 1949 by Waddington’s Games, which
sold the U.S. rights to Parker Brothers that same year. It is now sold
in over 40 countries, usually under either the British name or the
slightly different American name. There are 324 different combinations
of the three unknown pieces of evidence, which must all be found to
solve the mystery of Mr. Boddy’s death. FTP, name this board game
which may end with Professor Plum, the knife, and the billiard room as
the answer.          | {Pygmalion} |  Some have speculated that the
male lead in this play was based on Alexander Bell. Its preface
expresses the author’s distaste at the mangling of the English
language, thus explaining the profession of one of its main
characters. This play begins with Freddy Eynsford-Hills meeting his
future bride, although she has not yet been refined by a linguistics
professor. Later adaptations of the play all have Eliza Doolittle and
Sir Higgins marry, much to the chagrin of its author. FTP, name this
1913 play by George Bernard Shaw that served as the inspiration for My
Fair Lady.          | {T’ang} accept equivalents |  Lasting from 618
to 906 AD, this dynasty had its capital in Chang’an. Overland trade
routes stretched to Syria and Rome after this dynasty subdued
neighboring nomadic peoples. The civil service examination system was
adjusted to help educated men without connections, allowing social
mobility. Painters Wu Daozi and Wang Wei worked during this period, as
did the poets Li Bo and Du Fu. FTP, name this dynasty, which followed
the Sui whose rulers included Taizong.          | {Center of Mass} or
{Center of Gravity} before mentioned - also accept Centroid before
"physics", prompt after |  In a triangle, its normalized barycentric
coordinates are given by 1,1,1 (one comma one comma one). The Euler
line passes through the orthocenter,circumcenter, and this point, and
it trisects both the segment joining the orthocenter and circumcenter
and all three of the triangle's medians. In physics, it remains
constant in a closed system with no external forces, and it can be
computed by the sum of the products of position and mass divided by
the total mass. FTP, name this point which is sometimes called the
center of gravity.          | {Dr. Strangelove} or How I Learned to
Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb |  The person who played the titular
character of this 1964 film was originally supposed to play all four
major characters, but Peter Sellers was forced to give one up due to
heart issues. This movie was rated third on AFI’s 100 Years, 100
Laughs list. This film begins when a general sends out bombers to
destroy the USSR, believing they are poisoning the water supply. FTP,
name this movie directed by Stanley Kubrick in which President Muffley
famously declares, “Gentlemen! You can’t fight in here. This is the
war room!”          | {Aufbau} Principle |  In addition to developing
a model of the atom, Niels Bohr also developed this. Its name comes
from the German word for “construction.” This principle is used with
Hund’s Rule and the Pauli Exclusion Principle to help in the creation
of the atomic diagrams. Under this principle, the 1s subshell is
filled first, but the 4s is filled before the 3d subshell. FTP, name
this principle which states that electrons fill orbitals of lowest
energy first.          | Dean {Acheson} |  This Yale and Harvard Law
School graduate’s first major government achievement was getting the
Senate to approve the US joining the United Nations. He was also a
major supporter of NATO, helped form the Marshall Plan and the Truman
Doctrine, and rejected the authority of the Communist Chinese
government. Although advisor to four presidents, public support went
against him when he refused to fire alleged communist Alger Hiss from
his department. Name this 1949 Secretary of State who, FTP, created
the idea of Communist Containment.          | Nadine {Gordimer} |
Seamus Heaney called her one of the “guerillas of imagination,” which
seems odd because most of her novels deal with true to life troubles.
The oppressive government banned many of her novels, including 1981’s
July’s People, because they dealt with relationships between whites
and blacks. More recently, she has been very involved in raising
awareness for HIV/AIDS in Africa. She worked with Woody Allen and
Chinua Achebe on a 2004 short story book Telling Tales, which was an
attempt to get government funding for HIV/AIDS research. FTP, name
this 1991 Nobel Laureate, the first South African to win the prize.
| {Node} |  In telecommunications, it can refer to either the starting
or ending point in signal flow. In computer science, these are basic
units used to build linked lists. Meaning any device connected to a
network in computer terminology, this is also where petioles connect
to the stem. Changes in the positions of these affect the frequency of
standing waves. FTP, give the term meaning a point on a wave at which
minimal amplitude occurs.          | {Hardy-Weinberg} Equation |  It
shows that recessive genes do not disappear from a gene pool, no
matter how small the population is. This holds true, as long as
mutation, gene flow, genetic drift, nonrandom mating, and natural
selection do not occur. It can be represented by an equation where “p”
represents a dominant allele and “q” the corresponding recessive
allele. FTP, name this equation that represents the relationship
between alleles and genotypes of a population.          | Jan {Smuts}
|  This man served as a guerilla leader in the Boer War and
contributed to the pamphlet A Century of Wrong. However, he believed
in cooperation with Great Britain. After serving as defense minister
under Botha, he led South Africa successfully against German East
Africa at the beginning of World War I. In 1917 he joined the Imperial
War Cabinet in London and helped establish the RAF. He worked with
Woodrow Wilson to advocate the League of Nations and later helped with
the establishment of the United Nations and became prime minister of
South Africa twice. FTP, name this man, the only person to sign the
peace treaties at the end of both world wars.          | Franz Joseph
{Haydn} |  When this man's voice changed at age seventeen, he was
thrown out of his choir into the streets. He served as Kapellmeister
for the Austrian aristocrat Count Morzin before employment by a much
wealthier family. One of his most famous symphonies written for
Nikolaus Esterhazy instructs the musicians to depart as they finish
their solos. His love of practical jokes is apparent in his music,
such as a sudden loud chord in the middle of a soft passage which then
continues as if no interruption had occurred. During his time in
London, FTP, this composer premiered twelve symphonies including the
Drumroll, Military, and Surprise.          | {Lysogenic} Cycle or
{Lysogeny}do not prompt on Lytic |  The presence of cro protein in a
cell prevents this process. Phage β [BAY-tuh] can insert the gene for
the diphtheria toxin during this process via the namesake conversion,
which can also result in an increase in the imperviousness of the host
cell’s external membrane. Induction, often involving UV radiation,
ends this process to begin its counterpart. In this process, the viral
DNA is mixed with host DNA, where it remains dormant for a time. Name,
FTP, this viral reproduction cycle that occurs before its companion,
lysis.          | {Pogrom}s |  Examples of this practice include the
1819 Hep-Hep riots and aspects of the Polish Cossack Uprising. It was
first formally referred to, however, to describe 1881 riots in Russia.
They also occurred after the assassination of Tsar Nicholas II of
Russia and during the German Kristallnacht. Name this term, Russian
for “devastation”, which, FTP, means a riot against a certain ethnic,
religious, or other minority group.          | Zend-{Avesta} |  This
religious text contains hymns, songs, and tales. Alexander the Great
is believed to have destroyed the original, and the version seen today
was put together in the thirteenth century. Ancient songs and hymns
make up its Gathas, and the Yarna details the sacrifice of Haoma. The
name of this text translates to “Book of the Law.” Laws are discussed
in the Vendidad, which also describes the creation myth of the world
and the first man, Yima. The “Zend” that often precedes its name
refers to this text’s interpretation. FTP, identify this collection of
works sacred to Zoroastrianism.          | Federico {García Lorca} |
He became famous with the production of Marina Pineda (Pi-NAY-duh), a
historical romance play. Salvador Dali designed the set for its
premiere in Barcelona. His play Blood Wedding chronicles how a husband
kills his runaway wife. When his friend Ignacio Sánchez Mejías (Eeg-
NAW-cee-o SAAN-chez May-HE- as) was killed in the ring, he wrote
Lament for the Death of a Bullfighter. He was shot by Falangist (Fa-
LAN-jist) soldiers before one of his most famous works was published
during the Spanish Civil War. FTP, name this Spanish playwright and
poet, creator of La Casa de Bernarda Alba.          | {Catherine of
Aragon} prompt on Catherine |  This woman’s pomegranate badge was not
engraved on her tomb in Peterborough Cathedral until 1891, and again
in 1986, at the 450th anniversary of her burial. She was exiled to a
number of royal residences, including The Moor, Ampthill, and
Kimbolton Castle, where she died. This princess first arrived in
England to be married to Arthur, with whom she had been betrothed
since the age of three. However, he soon died, and she married her
more famous husband. FTP, name this first wife of Henry VIII and
mother of Mary I.          | Kingdom of {Thailand} |  Most of this
nation’s eastern region lies on the Korat Plateau. The Chao Phraya is
the largest river within the country, while its eastern border is
formed by a larger river. The Isthmus of Kra forms the western
boundary of its namesake gulf. The Tanen Range lies on its northern
border, while the Dangrek Chain forms its border with Cambodia. FTP,
name this Southeast Asian country with its capital at Bangkok.
| The {Trix Rabbit} |  First appearing on a television ad in 1967,
this character, created by Joe Harris, is a commercial symbol. The
trademarked phrase concerning it is 59th on TV Land’s list of greatest
quotes and catch phrases. Commercials show him trying to “steal” the
marketed item, only to be baffled by kids every time. The character
has only ever been seen eating the cereal he represents twice. FTP,
name this “silly” lagomorph, who can never obtain his desired cereal
food.      ---|---          | Henry Heinz (Alfred) {Kissinger} |  He
went from being a German Jewish student in World War II to working as
a Harvard professor who advised the National Security Adviser, as well
as New York Governor and presidential hopeful Nelson Rockefeller. His
skills as a negotiator working with China, the Soviet Union, and
Vietnam, as well as with Israel and Arab countries after the Yom
Kippur War earned him the 1973 Nobel Peace Prize. FTP, name this
National Security Adviser and Secretary of State under Presidents
Nixon and Ford.          | {Bifrost} / {Bilfrost} / {Bilrost} / {Bif-
raust} accept {Asbru} before mentioned |  A combination of fire,
water, and air, it will serve as the path of and be destroyed by the
Sons of Muspell, the frost giants, as they cross from the well of Urd
to Asgard. This pathway is also called Asbru and stretches from
Midgard to Asgard. To alert the Aesir of the arrival of the giants, it
is guarded day and night by Heimdall. Descriptions of it vary, with
some including all colors, and others, only three. FTP, name this
rainbow bridge of Norse mythology.          | {Integral} |  The
Lebesgue (luh BEG) variety, based on the measure theory of sets, is
usable when the function is not piecewise continuous, which cannot be
said for the standard kind. The Gaussian variety can be used over a
closed surface containing a volume. The improper variety can be used
over unbounded domains that include infinity. The standard variety is
Riemann’s, which on a Cartesian plane is performed by considering
arbitrarily small rectangles drawn from the function to the x-axis,
and adding up the areas. FTP, name this concept in calculus that
according to the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus is the opposite of a
derivative.          | The {Oath of the Horatii} |  Three women appear
in the lower right of this 1784 painting. Two are leaning on each
other, and one is holding her children. The figures are separated into
three groups by the archways in the background. The man in the center
is the only figure alone. He holds up three swords to the three
brothers on the left. All three wear helmets and one is holding a
spear as they all reach towards the swords. FTP, name this painting by
Jacques Louis-David.          | {Hooke}’s Law |  This law was first
presented as an anagram in 1676 and then later presented in Latin.  It
only applies to certain materials under certain conditions; they must
return to their original structure after being deformed.    FTP, name
the law that states that the amount that a linear-elastic substance is
deformed is directly related to the force causing the deformation, or
more simply that force is directly proportional to extension.
| {Jerk}, accept {Jolt} before mentioned |  For simple harmonic
motion, it is equal to negative one times the velocity. The three next
highest derivatives after it have no agreed names, but have been
informally called snap, crackle, and pop by some scientists. In
construction of railroads and roller coasters, engineers generally try
to keep its value low to prevent discomfort such as whiplash.
Occasionally called jolt in British literature, FTP, what is the third
derivative of position, the rate of change in acceleration          |
{Xylem} |  This plant tissue is formed in woody plants by the vascular
cambium, but in non-woody plants, it forms from the procambium. In
woody plants, lignin is deposited in the cell walls of these tissues,
forming wood. In angiosperms, it is generally composed of several
types of cells, including tracheids, which are usually dead.
Gymnosperms typically possess only tracheids. The cohesion of water
molecules as they evaporate from the leaves is responsible for drawing
water and minerals up through it from the roots. FTP, name this plant
tissue, found in bundles with its counterpart, phloem, as veins in
leaves.          | {Oedipus Rex} accept {Oedipus the King} The titular
character of this work was left with a shepherd as a baby for fear
that he would kill his father, whose later death is attributed to a
band of thieves. The Oracle at Delphi is consulted several times in
this work, despite the presence of the blind prophet Tiresias. The
plot thickens when a messenger from Corinth reveals that King Polybus
is dead, but while the title character is to return to rule his
kingdom, he was not his biological son. The line of questioning that
follows causes Jocasta to commit suicide and the title character to
blind himself. For 10 points, name this play that formed the basis of
a certain Freudian complex and was written by Sophocles about a king
of Thebes. The {Canterbury Tales} |  It begins with a contest between
the characters, who have met at the Tabard Inn, and ends with an
apology absolving the author of any sacrilege in the book, since parts
of the book satirize the Church. One story is about the adventures of
a rooster named Chanticleer, while another involves the murder of a
Christian boy by Jews and how his body is found, and a third is the
story of Palamon and Arcite, two Greek knights who love the same
woman. FTP, name this collection of 22 stories in verse and two in
prose, written by Geoffrey Chaucer.          | {Hong Wu} accept {Zhu}
Yuanzhang |  After seventy-six years of Mongol rule in China, this
Buddhist monk joined a rebellion and quickly rose to the head of a
rebel army. In 1356 he captured the city of Nanjing and made it his
capital. As emperor his economic policies were aimed towards helping
peasants. While he maintained the traditional lowly merchant class, he
greatly elevated the military. During the dynasty founded by this man,
the novel was invented in China, the surviving portions of the Great
Wall were finished, and porcelain pottery reached its height. FTP,
name this emperor whose title means “Vast Military,” the founder of
the Ming Dynasty.          | {Saki} or Hector Hugh {Munro} |  This
British author who died during World War I was born in Burma. Best
known for his short stories, he also wrote novels and plays. Several
of his works somewhat imitated those of Rudyard Kipling, as in his Not
So Stories. He is known for his wit, and also wrote a history of
Russia. This man wrote his satire under a pen name borrowed from the
cupbearer to the gods in the Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam. FTP, identify
this author of the Schartz-Metterklume Method and The Open Window.
| {Electronegativity} |  Definitions of this property, discovered in
1932 by Linus Pauling, have been given by Mulliken, Sanderson, and
Allen. This property is related to Electron Affinity in that it has
the same periodic trend: it increases as one moves across a period,
and decreases as one moves down a group. Although Francium has the
largest Atomic Radius of any element, it has the lowest value for this
property. FTP, name this atomic property, the ability to attract
electrons during bonding, of which Fluorine has the highest value.
| {Messiah} DO NOT accept The Messiah |  Composition of this massive
work was begun in August, 1741, and it was completed in twenty-three
days. It consists of three parts, the first of which details
prophecies concerning the titular figure. The conclusion of the second
part prompted the king present at its performance to give a standing
ovation. The third part entails the final overthrow of death and the
glorification of Jesus Christ. The libretto by Charles Jennens uses
texts from the King James Bible. FTP, name this oratorio by George
Frideric Handel.          | {Habsburg} or {Hapsburg} Dynasty |  This
dynasty’s name comes from their ancestral home, translated Hawk’s
Castle. Several of its members, including Charles V, were Holy Roman
Emperors, and Maximilian first married Mary, heiress of Burgundy, and
later Joan, heiress of Spain. Charles VI issued the Pragmatic
Sanction, describing the pattern of inheritance after his death to
ensure that the family remained in power. However, it was disregarded,
and the War of the Austrian Succession resulted. FTP, name this
dynasty with Spanish and Austrian branches which fell apart after
World War I.          | {Plasmid}s |  In these structures,
supercoiling takes place due to the abnormal shape of the structure. A
type of these structures is an episome which can become part of the
normal DNA and remain there for long periods of time. A common
property contained on these structures is a resistance to antibiotics,
or the ability to utilize lactose for a food source. They are often
used as vectors in cloning or putting together recombinant DNA, due to
their ability to replicate independently of the rest of the cell’s
DNA. FTP, name these small, circular pieces of DNA found in bacteria.
| {Cambodia} |  The southwestern region of this country contains the
Cardamom Mts., while its northern border runs along the southern edge
of the Korat Plateau. Its largest lake, Tonle Sap, is on a tributary
of the major river of this country, which runs through five provinces.
The Khone Falls lie just north of its border, in Laos. FTP, identify
this country in Southeast Asia through which the Mekong River flows,
with the capital at Phnom Penh.          | Thomas {Nast} |  This
German immigrant’s first career was drawing anti-slavery cartoons for
Harper’s Weekly, although he is better known for coming up with the
modern Santa Claus, along with the symbols for the major political
parties of his time. Name this “Prince of Caricatures” and “Father of
American Political Cartoons” who, FTP, is best known for breaking up
the Tweed Ring.      ---|---          | Pablo {Neruda} |  He was born
Neftalí Ricardo Reyes Basoalto (Nef-tall-EE Ree-CAR-do RAY-ays Bah-so-
ALL-toe) and took his penname when writing poems for the magazine
Selva Austral. He began writing at the age of ten, and was later
taught by Gabriela Mistral. His collections include 100 Love Sonnets
as well as Odes to Common Things. He was appointed consul to Burma and
later became a Marxist. In 1953, he was awarded the Stalin Prize, and
in 1971, he earned the Nobel Prize in Literature. FTP, name this
Chilean poet who wrote Twenty Love Poems and a Song of Despair.
| {Artemis} (do NOT prompt on or accept Diana because Zeus is
mentioned) |  One of the many children of Zeus, this goddess is also
called Cynthia. The protector of youth, this maiden goddess holds the
cypress and deer sacred. The hunter Actaeon was changed into a deer
and torn to pieces by his own hounds for having the bad luck to come
upon this goddess bathing. She also brought about the death of the
hunter Orion, although this story varies greatly. Name this goddess,
identified with Hecate (hek-AH-tee), Selene and Phoebe, who, FTP, was
the goddess of the hunt.          | {Libertarian} Party |  In 1971 it
was founded in the home of David Nolan, and it ran a presidential
ticket the following year consisting of John Hospers and Toni Nathan.
When faithless Republican elector Roger MacBride voted for the pair,
this third party was catapulted to national prominence. Its best
electoral performance came in 1980 when Ed Clark received more than 1%
of the vote, but its 1988 candidate, current Texas Representative Ron
Paul, is perhaps the most well known. FTP, name this US third party
which favors minimal government, laissez- faire markets, and strong
individual liberty.          | {Las Meninas} accept The {Maids of
Honor} before mentioned |  In 1957 Picasso recreated this 1656
painting in a work sharing the same name. The original features the
painter himself next to an easel at the left. King Philip IV of Spain
and Mariana of Austria can be seen in a mirror, and a courtier stands
in the doorway. Other figures include a dwarf named Maribarbola, a
fool, a mastiff, and two maids attending the central Infanta
Margarita. FTP, name this painting by Diego Velazquez whose title
translates to The Maids of Honor.          | {Infinity} |  The
projective plane has a point here where parallel lines intersect. In
set theory, its smallest values are aleph 0 and omega, a cardinal and
ordinal number respectively. The cardinal variety is equal to itself
doubled and to its own square. It can be said to be the sum of all
terms of the harmonic series, which is equivalent to saying that the
natural logarithm tends to this value for very high inputs. FTP, name
this quantity that describes the size of the natural numbers and real
numbers and is the inverse of zero.          | {Crimean} War |
Although this war had fronts in the Baltic and Pacific, British forces
there did not receive the medal awarded to forces in the namesake
region, which had four clasps for the major battles, including Alma
and Inkerman. It included Ottoman defeats at Kars and Sinope and began
partly because the Russians had invaded the Ottoman provinces of
Moldavia and Wallachia. FTP, identify this war whose battle of
Balaklava included the “thin red line” and the Charge of the Light
Brigade, and took place on a namesake Black Sea peninsula.          |
{Balfour} Declaration |  The policy begun by this document was changed
in 1939 to end immigration by 1944 and reduce it before then in order
to ease tensions with the local Arab peoples. This declaration was
first announced in a letter to Lord Rothschild in 1917, and was made
mainly as a result of the efforts of Nahum Sokolow and Chaim Weizmann,
who were leaders of the Zionist movement in Great Britain. FTP, name
this declaration calling for a Jewish homeland in Palestine.
| {Caspian} Sea |  One peninsula jutting into this body of water is
the Abseron, and the Aras and Kura Rivers empty into it south of that
peninsula. Other rivers feeding it include the Terek and the Atrek,
which is the only major river on its southeastern side. It is bounded
to the south by the Elburz Mountains, and to its east is the Ust’-Urt
Plateau. The Kara Bogaz Gol, on it east side, was originally a gulf of
this lake, but a manmade embankment recently formed it into a shallow
lagoon. FTP, name this saltwater lake whose other tributaries include
the Ural and Volga Rivers.          | {Starbucks} Corporation |  The
first one opened in Russia opened in September 2007 after the firm won
a legal dispute that had delayed its opening for over a year.  One in
Beijing’s Forbidden City was removed and replaced with a more
traditional locale. Stockings by the Fire is a recent CD released by
this company’s entertainment department, while music is also available
by Paul McCartney, James Taylor, and Van Morrison.  With a special
Gingerbread, Peppermint, and Eggnog Holiday Trio, FTP, this is what
coffee chain famous for its Frappuccino Blended Coffee and espresso-
based drinks.          | The {Four Seasons} accept Le {Quattro
Stagioni} |  This Baroque work was one of the first examples of
programmatic music. Each tone poem corresponds with a sonnet written
by the composer. It was written in 1723 and the countryside of Mantua
is believed to have been its inspiration. Chill winds, singing birds,
and a violent thunderstorm are among the elements depicted in the
concertos. The composer was an accomplished violinist as well as a red
priest. FTP, name this series of four violin concertos by Antonio
Vivaldi.          | {Alzheimer’s} Disease |  This disease, the 7th
most common cause of death in the United States, is impossible to
diagnose until an autopsy is performed after the ill person dies. It
is caused by damage to the brain’s linguistic and memory centers
through the development of clumps or tangles of brain tissue. Name
this most common form of dementia, most prevalent in people over 60,
which, FTP, has no cure and includes symptoms such as memory loss and
sudden feelings of anxiety or aggravation.          | {Work} |  It can
be calculated by taking the integral of torque with respect to the
angular positions before and after.  An alternative definition says
that at constant volume and pressure, it is simply the product of
pressure and the change in volume.  If volume is constant, then it is
zero.  It is energy transferred to or from a system by means of an
external force, and when friction is not involved, it is equal to the
change in mechanical energy. FTP, identify the scalar quantity whose
units are joules and whose derivative is power.          | Sherlock
Holmes accept partial name |  Women in his life include Irene Adler,
Maud Bellamy, and Mary Russell. He retired to Sussex to keep bees. His
brother’s name is Mycroft, and he is a Capricorn. He met his famous
companion, a former member of the Army Medical Department, in A Study
in Scarlet. He tangles with Moriarty in The Final Problem, in which he
notably “dies.” His creator, however, brought him back for several
more stories and this resident of 221B Baker Street’s last case is in
His Last Bow. FTP, name this fictional detective created by Sir Arthur
Conan Doyle.          | The {Iron Curtain} |  It was truly formed in
1945, although Ethel Snowden gave it its name twenty- five years
earlier, and it was not globally known until the next year. Behind it
“laid all the capitols of the ancient states,” and it stretched from
Stettin to Trieste.” A March 6th, 1946 political cartoon showed it
blocking concerned Europeans from a great frenzy of building and a
large sign that said “No Admittance by Order of Joe.” FTP, name this
symbolic communist structure cutting Europe in half after World War
II.          | The {Wind in the Willows} |  This book opens with a
subterranean mammal that refuses to resume spring- cleaning and
travels to the surface, viewing his first river and boat. Later, he
and two others help an imprisoned ‘River-Banker’ escape his cell under
the guise of a washerwoman after being arrested for reckless driving.
They then journey back to the “River-Banker’s” namesake hall to
reclaim it from the stoats and weasels. FTP, name this children’s book
by Kenneth Grahame, chronicling the adventures of Water Rat, Mr.
Badger, Mole, and Toad.          | Latent {Heat of Vaporization} |
Knowing this figure for a substance allows for the calculation of
vapor pressure of a liquid at any temperature. It is equivalent to the
amount of heat released when a gas condenses on a surface. This heat
provides enough energy to break down intermolecular bonds in a liquid
and is enough to convert a liquid to a gas. FTP, name this amount of
energy, measured in calories per gram, required to change one gram of
liquid into the gaseous state at boiling point               |
{Balkan} Wars |  The second of these wars concerned the division of
Macedonia amongst the members of the namesake league, and was sparked
by Bulgaria’s attack on Greek and Serbian armies in Macedonia. Albania
became an independent state as a result of these wars, and because
Austria did not approve of the terms imposed on Bulgaria by Serbia in
the second treaty, the stage was set for the beginnings of World War
I. FTP, name these two wars in which the Ottoman Empire lost almost
all its European possessions.          | John {Hancock} |  Before
entering politics, this minister’s son clerked for his uncle and his
inheritance placed him at the head of Massachusetts’ largest merchant
company. He owned a ship named Liberty that was suspected of shipping
contraband goods. Although he died as Governor of Massachusetts, he
was also a President of the Continental Congress. Despite his
presidential ambitions, he only received 4 electoral votes in the
election of 1789, and he didn’t run again. FTP, name this man, the
first signer of the Declaration of Independence.          | {Alberta}
|  This province includes the Birch and Caribou Mts., and the Swan
Hills, but its highest peak is Mt. Columbia, in Jasper National Park.
Other National Parks in it include Banff and part of Wood Buffalo. The
Lesser Slave Lake, as well as some of Lake Athabasca, is in this
province. Cities in it include Medicine Hat and Calgary. FTP, identify
this Canadian province with its capital at Edmonton.          | Kanye
{West} |  He won the Nobel Peace Prize in Physics and the
Nickelodeon’s Kid Choice award for Best TV Show during Saturday Night
Live’s opening episode this year.  He was the show’s musical guest and
performed two songs from his latest album. After being challenged to a
battle by rival rap star 50 Cent, he won by selling the most copies of
his album since its September 11th release.  FTP, name this musician
who has enjoyed success with his albums Late Registration and
Graduation and his hit song Stronger.          | {Fibonacci Numbers}
or {Fibonacci Sequence} prompt on Fibonacci |  Yuri Matiyasevich [mah
tee YAH seh vich] solved Hilbert’s tenth problem by linking them with
a diophantine equation. The associated generating function is x over
the quantity one minus x minus x squared, which can be used to prove
that the nth term is equal to phi to the n plus one minus phi to the n
divided by the square root of five, where phi is the golden ratio. Its
namesake first studied the sequence in his Liber Abaci after
considering a hypothetical system of rabbit reproduction. FTP, name
this sequence of numbers in which each number past the second is the
sum of the previous two.          | Niccolo {Machiavelli} |  This man
started his diplomatic career as the Second Chancellor of the Republic
of Florence under Piero Soderini. He turned to literary works after
retiring to his farm when the government was dissolved and he was
wrongly suspected of conspiracy and tortured. He is known for writing
a study on The Art of War as well as Discourses on the Ten Books of
Titus Livy. Although the de Medici family had accused him of
conspiracy, he gradually won back their favor and completed a History
of Florence for them before dying. FTP, name this author of The
Prince.          | Maurits Cornelis {Escher} |  He is featured as one
of the title trio in David Hofstadter’s Pulitzer Prize- winning book,
which includes prints of his works. The Penrose triangle in Waterfall
illustrates his fascination with perspective and impossible
structures. His lithographs and woodcuts are well-liked by
mathematicians for their polyhedra and use of symmetry, as well as
their divisions of the geometric plane. FTP, name this Dutch graphic
artist known for his tessellations and optical illusions.          |
John {Locke} |  He was one of the most important English Empirical
philosophers, not only for writing a critical work of metaphysics, but
also for bringing the Enlightenment to Britain. In his 1690 An Essay
Concerning Human Understanding, he wrestled with new ideas on truth
and knowledge. His ideas on government also influenced Thomas
Jefferson. Name this philosopher who, FTP, developed the idea of
Tabula Rasa and shares a name with a character from the hit show Lost.
| {Opium} Wars |  The second of these wars, also known as the Arrow
War, began when a pirate vessel, the Arrow, was stopped by the
authorities, who reportedly pulled down the British flag. The first
had resulted from the seizure of the namesake drug by Lin Zexu. The
treaties of Nanjing and Tientsin, ending the first and second
respectively, forced China to open several ports to Britain and pay an
indemnity, as well as to cede Hong Kong. FTP, name these wars in which
Britain and France easily defeated Chinese forces.          | The
{Sorcerer’s Apprentice} or {Apprenti Sorcier} |  This 1897 orchestral
work was based on a work by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe written one
hundred years earlier, which was in turn based on a work by the Greek
poet Lucian. A scherzo, it is in ¾ time. This eight-minute-long piece
was featured in the third segment of a 1940 film. One section of this
piece is entitled “The March of the Brooms.” Another character was
originally planned for the role in the movie, but the producer chose
his favorite cartoon instead. FTP, name this Paul Dukas work
popularized by Disney’s Fantasia.          | Robert Strange {McNamara}
|  One of the “whiz kids,” this man revolutionized Ford Motor Company
before becoming US Secretary of Defense. He is better noted, however,
for working in the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations on the subject
of Vietnam. He eventually developed a deep skepticism for the
continuation of the war and in 1986 left to work at the World Bank.
FTP, name this Harvard Business Graduate whose investigation of the
Vietnam War was published in The Pentagon Papers.          |
{Photosynthesis} |  This process can take place with many different
types of absorption pigments and two possible pathways. In addition,
there are three types of this process, with variants for species
living in extreme conditions. CAM and C4 pathways change either the
time or the space where this process occurs. In the Calvin cycle, ATP,
NADPH, and carbon dioxide produce glucose. FTP, name this process by
which autotrophs, most notably plants, make their food.          |
{Sister Carrie} |  This novel follows the lives of two people on
opposite ends of the social ladder and their ascent and descent to the
other. The title character rises to become an actress, and George
Hurstwood ends up on the street. The novel was unique for its time in
that its characters’ fates are decided randomly rather than on the
basis of morals. Though it did not sell very well when it was first
published in 1900, some now think of it as the First Modern American
Novel. FTP, name this novel by Theodore Dreiser.          | {Le
Chatelier’s} Principle |  In economics, this law deals with
constrained maximization problems.  In biology, it has been used to
explain receptor activation.  However, this principle is most often
used to increase the yield of reversible reactions. Adding an inert
gas into a system at equilibrium may or may not invoke a change due to
this principle.  FTP, name this principle that states that equilibrium
shifts to counteract changes in pressure, temperature, volume, and
concentration.          | The {Little Prince} or Le {Petit Prince} |
This book is loosely based on delusions the author suffered after
crash landing in the Sahara Desert and is one of the fifty best-
selling books of all time. Though often considered a children’s book,
it forays into deep philosophical speculation about humanity through
stories about a young extraterrestrial’s travels between planets and
his encounters with adults, a fox, a snake, and a rose. The novel’s
stranded narrator draws the title character a sheep in FTP, what book
of Antoine de Saint-Exupéry.          | Francis Scott Key {Fitzgerald}
|  A member of the “Lost Generation,” this author sometimes used
direct quotes from his wife’s diary in his works. While he completed
four novels, he is also known for short stories and essays, such as
one describing a descent into insanity called The Crack-Up. He also
wrote an unfinished novel, The Last Tycoon. His relationship with
Zelda Sayers heavily influenced his work. FTP, name this famed Jazz
Age author of Tender is the Night, This Side of Paradise, The
Beautiful and the Damned, and The Great Gatsby.          | {Dalton’s
Law of Partial Pressures} prompt on Dalton’s Law |  Raoult’s Law is
similar to this law, except that Raoult had knowledge of mole
fractions, where the developer of this law did not. This law’s
developer contributed greatly to the field of chemistry, but is
perhaps best known for being the developer of an important atomic
theory. FTP, name this law which states that the total pressure of a
gaseous mixture is equal to the sum of the pressures of each component
in the mixture, an 1801 law named for an English chemist.          |
{Nighthawks} |  This 1942 painting features two buildings and a number
of people. The building on the left has closed for the day, and a lone
object can be seen in a window. The second floor is orange, while the
bottom is green. The building on the right features the name of a
cigar company across the top. All three men in the painting wear hats.
One of them and a woman in a red dress are seated together, looking at
the man in white behind the counter. He looks back at them as though
saying something. The third man is seated alone, looking away from the
viewer. FTP, name this Edward Hopper painting.      ---|---          |
Robert {Boyle} |  This person worked in the “Invisible College” with
the likes of Robert Hooke and Christopher Wren, trying to become
smarter through scientific experimentation. This scientist’s work with
gas really began in 1659 when he and Hooke completed their
“Pneumatical Engine”, which was modeled on Otto von Guericke’s air
pump. Bernoulli derived the law in 1738, but John Waterson’s 1845
paper on kinetic theory introduced it. Along with Charles and Gay-
Lussac, he derived part of the ideal gas law. FTP, name this person
who saw the relationship between pressure and volume.          | David
{Beckham} |  His debut season at the Home Depot Center was rather
disappointing, as his team failed to reach the playoffs and an ankle
injury he received in late August prevented him from playing for the
majority of the end of the season. He returned to his national squad
for matches against Croatia and Austria, although he had been dropped
from the team following his resignation as captain during the 2006
World Cup. His former team Real Madrid won the Spanish League during
his last season. FTP, name this English Soccer star who relocated to
the LA Galaxy in summer 2007 and is married to Victoria Adams.
| {Ban} Ki-Moon |  In the 2006 election that landed him in his current
post, he beat out Shashi Tharoor after winning every straw pole and
traveling the entire globe while on campaign. Previously, he had
served as director of the International Organizations and Treaties
bureau, Ambassador to Austria, and most recently the Foreign Minister
of his home country, where the press nicknamed him “the slippery eel”
for his ability to avoid answering questions. FTP, name this South
Korean successor to Kofi Annan, the current UN Secretary General.
| {One} |  In Boolean algebra, it is the result when the operation
"or" is used with it and any element, and it functions as the identity
of the "and" operation. It is the only odd output of Euler's totient
function, the amount of numbers less than a given one relatively prime
to the given number, and it is the only positive number with the same
representation in all base systems. Neither prime nor composite, FTP,
give this smallest positive integer that functions as the
multiplicative identity.          | Sir {Gawain and the Green Knight}
or Sir {Gawain and the Knight of the Green Chapel} (accept similar) |
It is 101 stanzas long, and was written in a West- or North-Midlands
dialect by an unknown poet, who is often called the Pearl Poet. It
begins when a knight visits Arthur’s court and challenges the Knights
of the Round Table to deal him a blow with an ax. One accepts the
challenge, but the knight merely picks up his severed head and tells
him to meet him a year later. He ends up before the mysterious knight
with a girdle from a lady he had met in a castle nearby, which would
supposedly protect him, however, the knight does not deal him a
killing blow. FTP, name this medieval tale of a knight of a certain
color who tests the title character’s honor.          | {Banksy} or
Robert {Banks} |  One of the few people to meet him face to face is
Simon Hattenstone, who met him for an interview for the Guardian
Unlimited. A recent auction of 10 of his works in Bonham, London sold
for more than half a million pounds and in October of 2007, it is
believed that the artist was captured on film by a passerby while at
work. He replaced over 500 of Paris Hilton’s album covers with
doctored work of his own and in the same year, he held an exhibition
entitled Barely Legal where he painted an elephant in a floral
wallpaper pattern. FTP, name this British graffiti artist famous for
his stunts in major art galleries and stenciled street art around the
world.          | {Dr. Zhivago} |  First published in Milan, this book
centers on a title character who marries Tonya but later lives with
Marina after having an affair with a third woman. He tricks the third
woman into fleeing with her daughter and Komarovsky while he stays
behind. At the end of the novel his friends meet a young woman who
they determine to be the daughter of the third woman, Lara. This novel
about revolutionary Russia won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1958,
which the Soviet government made the author decline. FTP, name this
novel of Boris Pasternak.          | {Retrovirus}es |  Widely studied
types include the avian sarcoma/leukosis virus, and the murine
leukemia virus. Some of them have, in addition to the ordinary genes
they need for replication, oncogenes, which can quickly cause tumors
in animals. Almost all of those with oncogenes are defective, and
require a helper virus to replicate. Due to a lack of proofreading,
they can mutate quickly and develop resistance to chemicals quickly.
FTP, name this group of viruses that require reverse transcriptase to
introduce their RNA into the host genome, of which the most well known
is HIV.          | {Cyprus} |  This island’s western point is Cape
Arnauti, and its eastern point is Cape Andreas, off of which is the
Klidhes Island. The eastern portion of it is primarily composed of the
Karpas Peninsula. Mountain ranges on this island include the Kyrenia
in the north and the Troodos in the south. There are two U.K. bases on
the southern coast of it. Towns on this island include Famagusta and
Paphos, as well as Nicosia. FTP, name this Mediterranean island whose
northern portion attempted to separate and form a new country.
| {Upanishads} |  These writings have a name meaning “to sit down
near” and were probably created by religious leaders while their
pupils sat near them. Another meaning of the name is “secret
knowledge.” There are around ten major ones, while there are possibly
over two hundred total. They are composed of the thoughts and ideas of
numerous religious sages relating to the major themes of Hinduism,
including monism, and they are used to make the messages of the Vedas
more accessible. FTP, name these Hindu religious texts, commentaries
on the Vedas.          | Walt {Whitman} |  This man’s later works were
influenced by having spent his early childhood in the country before
moving to Brooklyn. During the Mexican War and the decade before the
Civil War, this author decided to write a work on the ideals of
America, such as democracy and unity, forming his major collection. He
also wrote two poems about Abraham Lincoln, When Lilacs Last in the
Dooryard Bloomed and O Captain, My Captain. FTP, name this author of
Song of Myself, which is contained in his collection Leaves of Grass.
| {Zulu} |  The regiments of this people were organized by age, and
were known as amabutho. Each regiment was issued a distinctive shield
covered in cowhide- older regiments had whiter shields while young
regiments used black ones. After the namesake war involving them, the
territory of King Cetshwayo was distributed amongst thirteen pro-
British chieftains to foster disunity. Later, however, Royalists tried
to return Cetshwayo to the throne, and civil war broke out. FTP, name
this South African tribe who suffered defeat at Ulundi in 1879, after
a great victory at Isandlwana and a defeat at Rorke’s Drift on the
same day.          | Grigory Yefimovich {Rasputin} or {Novych} |  This
wanderer’s popular name means “the debauched one” in reference to his
beliefs on how to become closest to god. He married and had four
children but still continued to wander as his fame as a healer and
soothsayer grew. He reached the height of his power when he became a
healer for the son of the royal family, whose blood disease was beyond
the skills of doctors at the time. This man was shot twice, poisoned,
bound, and dumped into the Neva River before he finally died, aiding
tales of his magic powers. FTP, name this Siberian healer of Aleksei
Romanov.          | {Resistance} |  According to quantum mechanics,
high values for it are a result of the existence of forbidden bands,
which cannot be occupied by electrons, between the conduction bands
and valence bands. It is directly proportional with length but
inversely proportional to cross-sectional area. This is analogous to
the fact that it increases as devices are added in series and
decreases as they are added in parallel. FTP, name this electric
property that measures how much a material impedes the flow of
electric current, equal to voltage over current according to Ohm’s
law.          | The {Stranger} or L’{Étranger} |  The narrator of this
novel meets his neighbor, Salamano whose scruffy dog has just run
away, after agreeing to help out a local pimp, Raymond Sintes. While
staying at a beach house with the latter, the protagonist shoots
Raymond’s mistress’s brother for no apparent reason. During the
resulting trial, the main character shows no remorse over the murder
or the death of his own mother, an event that commenced the book. FTP,
identify this novel centering on Meursault by Albert Camus [cam-OO].
| {The Valkyrie} accept {Die Walküre} |  In this opera, Siegmund is
overpowered by Hunding at the hands of his grieving father Wotan.
Brunnhilde flees with Sieglinde and the shards of Siegmund's sword,
Nothung. As her punishment, Wotan strips her of immortality and puts
her into a magic sleep on a mountain. Wotan agrees to her last request
that she be surrounded by a ring of fire, only to be passed by the
greatest of heroes. Both Brunnhilde and Wotan know that it will be
passed by Sieglinde's unborn son Siegfried. FTP, name this Wagner
opera, the second in the Ring cycle.          | {Hydrogen} Bonding |
These contribute greatly to the viscosity of Phosphoric Acid and
Glycerol, as well as dimer formation in Carboxylic Acid, even in the
gas phase. More famously, their crystalline structure in a certain
type of molecule can cause the solid state of that molecule to be less
dense than the liquid. They can be described as a stronger version of
Dipole-Dipole Force, with only Nitrogen, Oxygen, and Fluorine bonding
to the namesake molecule. FTP, name this type of intermolecular force,
most commonly associated with water.          | Ethan {Allen} |  In
his early childhood, this man was sent to Reverend John Lee so that he
could later go to Yale. However, his father’s death prevented him from
going to Yale as he had to take care of his family, being the eldest
child. During the French and Indian War, he enlisted in the militia,
yet he never went into the battlefield. He would later see action
during the Revolutionary War until he captured Crown Point. A pioneer
for the freedom of his state, he died two years before Vermont became
one. FTP, name this man who captured Fort Ticonderoga with his Green
Mountain Boys.          | {XYZ Affair} |  Elbridge Gerry joined
Charles Pinckney and would stay while the latter left after Jean
Hottinguer and a Mr. Bellamy came to discuss a loan between two
nations. A popular American phrase after this foreign relations crisis
was “Millions for defense, but not a cent for tribute.” It began after
France began to worry about US military support for Britain after
Jay’s Treaty. Name this affair that led to the Alien and Sedition Act
and, FTP, began when Charles Talleyrand sent three French agents to
American ambassadors requesting a payment before negotiations between
the two nations.          | The {Color Purple} |  The protagonist of
this novel marries the man courting her sister, as their stepfather
refuses to let her sister marry. Her husband’s son Harpo and his
relationships with Sofia and Squeak provide a large subplot. The
narrator’s sister runs away and is not heard from again until the
narrator’s lover Shug finds hidden letters years later. Through these
letters, the narrator learns that the two children her stepfather,
their father, stole as babies are alive and living with missionaries,
as well as her sister Nettie, in Africa. FTP, name this Alice Walker
novel narrated by Celie.      ---|---          | {Seinfeld} |  One of
its stars appeared in the unsuccessful CBS sitcom Listen Up and
portrayed Boris Badenov in the 2000 film adaptation of Rocky and
Bullwinkle. The lead female now stars in her own show The New
Adventures of Old Christine. Another was caught using a racial slur
during a stand up comedy routine while at the Laugh Factory, and the
co-creator recently voiced a character in his first film, Bee Movie.
Created by Larry David, FTP, name this Emmy Award winning sitcom
featuring Elaine Benes, Cosmo Kramer, George Costanza, and the titular
Jerry.          | The {Stone Breakers} |  The two men depicted in this
1849 painting are not models but actual workers in the title
profession. The artist met them while walking down the road and
painted them as they were, down to the tears in their tattered
clothes. The grass beside the road slopes up slightly, but shadows
hide most of the background. Seemingly out of place is a pot resting
on the right edge of the painting. The older man wears a hat and
wields a hammer while kneeling. The younger man stands, holding a
basket of stones. FTP, name this Realist painting by Gustave Courbet.
| Ian {Fleming} |  A children’s work of this author written for his
son Caspar features an inventor who fixes the titular car, which later
comes to life. He found the name for his most famous character when he
met an ornithologist in Jamaica. The series of twelve novels and two
short story collections in which this character appears was likely
influenced by his time in the Naval Intelligence Division in WWII. As
well as Chitty Chitty Bang Bang and his famous series, he also wrote
two nonfiction books. FTP, name this creator of James Bond.          |
{Gestalt} [gesh-TALT] Psychology accept phonetic pronunciation
Wolfgang Köhler and Kurt Koffka worked with Max Wertheimer [VERT-high-
mer], who wrote the "Experimental Studies of the Perception of
Movement", thereby founding this movement. Wertheimer's phi phenomenon
and the resulting flipbooks are the most common use of this group's
research, as the sum of each individual drawing becomes a greater,
moving whole. "Pattern", "form" and "shape" are common translations
of, For 10 points, this German school of psychology.  Johann Sebastian
{Bach} |  His time in Weimar produced one of his lesser known
compositions, Little Organ Book, which is a collection of chorale
preludes. In his lifetime he composed over two hundred cantatas and
over two hundred chorales. His large-scale sacred works include the
Christmas Oratorio and Mass in B Minor. However, he may be best known
for his keyboard works. Increasingly complex fugues are constructed on
a simple theme in The Art of Fugue. Preludes are paired with fugues
and cycle through all twenty-four keys in The Well-Tempered Clavier.
FTP, name this prolific German composer and patriarch of a large
musical family.          | {i} or {Imaginary} {Number} or {Imaginary
Unit} |  In the Argand plane, the vertical axis represents
coefficients of this number. In La Géométrie, Descartes described it
derogatively, and it was first notated in its current form by Euler.
First defined by Rafael Bombelli during the Renaissance, this number
is critical to the fundamental theorem of algebra. FTP, name this
number commonly used in denoting the roots of negative numbers.
| Ethel and Julius {Rosenberg} accept plural |  A friend and coworker
of this family was attacked by Mexican thugs. The patriarch of this
family, interestingly, had asked his doctor about visiting Mexico just
three months prior to this event. Considering that the man had just
advised Greenglass to flee the country, it is probable that he was
going to do the same. However, Greenglass later stated that his
testimony against the mother of this family was perjury. FTP, name
this family whose parents were killed for giving atomic bomb plans to
the Russians in the Cold War.          | {Lysosome}s |  This organelle
was discovered by Christian Rene de Duve, and is formed from the Golgi
apparatus. It is utilized in endocytosis to transport materials out of
the cell membrane and in phagocytosis to digest large materials that
the cell needs. When it malfunctions and produces too many enzymes, it
causes Tay- Sachs disease. Name this organelle, made up of enzymes
surrounded by a membrane that, FTP, has its main purpose in breaking
down cellular waste.          | {Recall} Election |  In 2005, Spokane
mayor James West was the victim of one of these, and in 1978 then-
Cleveland mayor Dennis Kucinich only very narrowly survived one. The
first governor to be ensnared by one was Lynn Frazier of North Dakota
in 1921, after which a successful one would not occur for another 82
years. Pat Brown, Pete Wilson, and Ronald Reagan were all briefly
faced with attempts at them, but it was Gray Davis who finally fell
prey to this action following widespread frustration over the state’s
energy crisis. FTP, identify this type of election most recently won
by Arnold Schwarzenegger.          | Nitrogen {Fixation} |  No
eukaryotes can carry out this process, and it is simpler for
anaerobes. Some bacteria that carry out this process are free-living,
while others are protected from oxygen through symbiotic relationships
with plants called legumes. In these relationships, the bacteria
inhabit the plants roots, where they can improve the soil quality for
the plants. Requiring enzymes such as nitrogenase and sixteen ATP,
this process combines molecular nitrogen with six electrons and eight
hydrogen ions. FTP, name this process in which nitrogen is reduced to
form ammonia.          | {Bernoulli}’s Principle |  This principle
gives the reason why windows explode in hurricanes, where the high
wind speeds outside cause a pressure imbalance. Airplanes are able to
fly also based on this principle, which causes the wings to be pushed
upwards at high speeds. This principle was discovered by a Swiss
scientist in the 1800s, and is one of the laws that deal with fluid
movement. FTP, name this principle, which states that as the velocity
of a fluid, increases, the pressure decreases.          | {Ottoman}
Empire or Turks or Caliphate or Sultanate do not accept Turkey |  The
founders of this empire were ghazi chieftains near Bursa, which was
made their capital in the fourteenth century. After it provided
mercenary troops for the Byzantine leader John VI Cantacuzenus [KAN-
ta-koo-ZEE-nus], Murad I brought its capital to Edirne before losing
his life during its defeat of the Serbians at Kosovo. Its decline was
marked by the failures of the Battle of Lepanto and the siege of
Vienna. FTP, name this empire who sieged Constantinople and made it
their capital of Istanbul.          | {Candide}: Or, All for the Best/
Or Optimism |  The love interest of the title character of this work
may be modeled after Émilie du Châtelet, a French physicist. The main
character’s teacher is a professor of “metaphysico-theologico-
cosmolonigology” who is very optimistic about life, even though he is
nearly killed by the Inquisition and then sold into slavery. The story
begins with the title character being kicked out of the castle of the
Baron Thunder-ten-trokh and forced to travel, where he experiences
such misfortunes as being involved in the Lisbon earthquake of 1755
and getting his El Dorado red sheep stolen. FTP, name this Voltaire
work in which the title character is in love with the Lady Cunegonde.
| {Oxidation} |  The removal of two carbons from a fatty acyl-CoA
molecule in the mitochondria is an example of this process. The
opposite term of this comes from the Latin stem meaning "to lead
back." After electrons were discovered, scientists became convinced
that this process involved the transfer of electrons from one atom to
another. While the term no longer applies to a single element, gaining
oxygen is a common form of this process.  FTP, name this term
describing the loss of electrons from an atom.          | {Anna
Karenina} |  Though this novel is not named for Levin, he can be
considered its other main character. Initially, the woman he loves
ignores him for a military man, causing him to return to his country
estate. After talking with her sister Dolly, he meets Kitty again at
the Oblonsky household where they fall in love. In the end, after much
doubt, he finally realizes that he does indeed love Kitty and their
son. The other part of the novel deals with the life of Dolly’s
sister-in-law, who has a long affair with Alexei Vronsky. FTP, name
this novel by Leo Tolstoy in which the titular character throws
herself under a train.          | Henry Morton {Stanley} |  Both women
this man loved married someone else while he was off exploring. Born
John Rowlands, his name change was inspired by a cotton broker he
worked for in New Orleans. He switched from the Confederate to Union
Army during the civil war. This man was a freelance journalist who
worked as a special correspondent for the New York Herald before his
first trip to Africa. He wrote several accounts of his journeys as
well as one novel. FTP, identify this man best known for saying,
“Doctor Livingstone, I presume?”          | Republic of {Panama} |
This country shares the Península Burica with the country to its west,
while the Península de Azuero juts south into the Pacific Ocean.
Mountain ranges in it include the Cordillera de San Blas and the
Cordillera de Talamanca. The Golfo de San Miguel empties into another
gulf with the same name as this nation. Lakes in it include Bayano and
Gatún, which is on a canal crossing the isthmus bearing this country’s
name. FTP, name this Central American nation bordering Costa Rica and
Colombia          | {Leviathan} |  The philosophy behind this work is
based on a proof inspired by the author’s meeting with Galileo
Galilei. The author established basic facts and then expanded upon
them to create his philosophy, which said that in order to avoid the
“war of all against all,” or civil war, peace and unity must be
achieved with a commonwealth through a social contract. FTP, name this
four-book work by Hobbes, whose name comes from the Hebrew word for
“sea monster.”          | Frederic {Chopin} |  In his review of this
composer’s Variations on a Theme from Don Giovanni, Robert Schumann
famously wrote, “Hats off, gentlemen, a genius!” At age twenty-four he
contracted pulmonary tuberculosis in Mallorca, and his lifelong ill
health is reflected in the bitterness of his scherzos and ballades.
His grief over his homeland’s oppression under Russia inspired some of
his greatest works. FTP, name this Polish pianist who composed the
“Heroic” Polonaise and “Funeral March” Sonata.      ---|---          |
{Interference} |  Lesser known examples of it include the lenses of
some binoculars and cameras, which are specifically designed to result
in a cancellation space. Sodium light is one of the most common ways
to identify this occurrence. Clear patterns of this are not easily
seen with white light, as the different colors have different fringes.
FTP, name this phenomenon which occurs when two different waves
combine and produce a new pattern, which can either be constructive or
destructive.          | William Tecumseh {Sherman} |  This Ohio native
graduated from West Point in 1840, but did not serve in the Mexican
War.   He entered the US Army as a colonel (Ker-nel) in the Civil War
and participated in the First Battle of Bull Run.  Although he was
quickly promoted to the rank of brigadier general by President
Lincoln, a nervous breakdown removed him from command. He served under
General Grant from 1862 until 1864 when he took command of the
Military Division of the Mississippi, putting him in charge of all
Union troops in the Western Theater. FTP, name this general famous for
his capture of Atlanta.          | Meriwether {Lewis} |  Before
reporting directly to Thomas Jefferson during the treason trial of
Aaron Burr, this man had been the later-President’s personal secretary
and had served in the militia to suppress the Whiskey Rebellion. His
training in navigation and his expertise in writing detailed
zoological and botanical accounts, as well as his familiarity with
Native Americans, made him well suited for his now-famous journey.
FTP, name this leader of the Corps of Discovery who chose a man under
whom he had served in the army, William Clark, as his second-in-
command to explore the Louisiana Purchase.          | {Centripetal}
Force |  Its original definition is in Issac Newton's Philosophiae
Naturalis Principia Mathematica. Some consider it more of an adjective
for a force such as gravity or electricity than a force itself.
However, an object experiencing this force travels at a constant speed
and its two components are tangential and perpendicular. The magnitude
of this force can alternately be expressed as the velocity squared
divided by the radius.  FTP, name this force that makes a body trace a
circular path.          | {Jacobin} Club or Society of the {Jacobins},
or les {Amis de la Liberté et de l’Égalite} or {Friends of Liberty and
Equality} |  The Dominican Covenant at which they met lent this
political club their popular nickname, though they were formally
called “la Société des Amis de la Constitution.” (la soh-see-et-AY day
zahm ee duh la CON sti tu see un) Their main rivals, the Feuillants
[fuh YAHNT], wanted a constitutional monarchy in France instead of an
outright democracy. While Marat was murdered because of his
association with this group, its most prominent deputy member was
Robespierre, after whose death the group began to disband. FTP, name
this group, the ruling French political party during “The Terror.”
| The {Catcher in the Rye} |  After being kicked out of his school in
Agerstown, Pennsylvania, the protagonist of this novel attacks and is
beat up by his roommate, Stradlater, because Stradlater tried to have
sex with his ex-girlfriend. He also travels by train to New York City,
lies to the mother of one of his classmates, dances with a girl in the
Lavender Room, and debates for a really long time about whether to
call his ex, Jane, or his sister. The protagonist is not very fond of
his brother, D.B., who is supposedly a Hollywood screenwriter, but is
good friends with his sister, Phoebe. FTP, name this novel about
Holden Caulfield’s adventures in New York City, a work by J.D.
Salinger.          | {Adrenal} Glands or {Adrenals} |  These organs
are influenced by corticoptropin hormones secreted by the pituitary
gland, which is in turn influenced by the hypothalamus to secrete
those hormones. The hormones cause the creation of corticosteroids in
the cortex of these organs. The cortex also produces androgen hormones
as well as aldosterone. The medulla of these glands has an entirely
different function from the cortex and is not necessary for life. It
produces a hormone which helps regulate blood pressure, as well as one
to regulate metabolic processes, heart rate, and smooth muscle
relaxation. FTP, name these glands above the kidneys which produce
epinephrine.          | {Peanuts} prompt on Charlie Brown |  The
premiere of this series involved one character confiding to another
how much he hated the main character in this work, in which minor
characters include Rerun and Franklin. Several major characters
originally started out as babies, but grew up while the original cast
did not until they reached the same age as the original cast. Many
have viewed this daily writing as a parody of existentialism,
featuring a teacher who we can’t understand, a principal that causes
fear and sickness when a student waits to see him, and a child who
waits every Halloween for the descent of his god-figure. FTP, name
this daily cartoon created by Charles Shultz.          | {Papua New
Guinea} do NOT accept New Guinea |  Islands to the north of this
nation include the Schouten Islands, and the Vitiaz Strait separates
its Huon Peninsula from Long Island. The major rivers in this country
are the Fly, Sepik, and Ramu. Other islands belonging to it include
New Britain, New Ireland, the Trobriands, and Bougainville. Its
tallest peak is Mount Wilhelm, and the Torres Strait separates it from
Cape York. FTP, identify this nation with a capital of Port Moresby,
which owns half of a namesake island.          | Desiderius {Erasmus}
Roterodamus/of Rotterdam |  This man was a member of the Northern
Renaissance and was among the first editors of the New Testament. Six
years of service in a monastery led to his distrust of monks and time
spent living at Oxford caused contempt for schoolmen. Lesser-known
works of this good friend of Thomas More include Encomium Moriae [en-
CO-me-um MORE-ee-eye] and Colloquia. FTP, name this Dutch humanist and
theologian, a Roman Catholic who was critical of the church’s excesses
as most clearly demonstrated in his satire Praise of Folly.          |
Rabindranath {Tagore} [ruh-BEEND-run-naht tuh-GOHR] |  This man was
the youngest of fourteen children, each of whom contributed to their
region’s culture and literature. One of his non-literary achievements
was the creation of a school, the Shantiniketan, and later a
university, the Viswabharati, near Calcutta, as an alternative to the
colonial education of Indians. He began his career as a poet, and
works of his include Fireflies, Red Oleanders, and The Crescent Moon.
FTP, name this writer, prominent in the Bengali Renaissance, who won
the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1913 and whose collection Gitanjali
or Song Offering had its introduction written by Yeats.          |
Willa {Cather} |  As a muckraker, she co-authored a biography
discrediting the Christian Science founder, Mary Baker Eddy. Later in
her career she based many of her novels' settings on her home state.
This author won the 1923 Pulitzer Prize for One of Ours and wrote
editorials for McClure’s Magazine after a brief stint as a high school
teacher. In one of her works, a titular character is working towards
the construction of a cathedral. Others include prominent Bohemian
characters. FTP, name this author of O Pioneers!, Death Comes for the
Archbishop, and My Antonia.          | {Factorial} |  It can be
generalized by the gamma function, which satisfies the identity that n
times gamma of n is equal to gamma of n plus one. It can be guessed
with Stirling's approximation, and it outgrows all polynomial and
exponential functions. The nth derivative of x to the n with respect
to x is this function of n. FTP, name this unary operation that gives
the number of ways to rearrange a finite number of distinct objects in
a line, written with an exclamation mark.          | The {Garden of
Earthly Delights} |  Heavily influenced by the predominant beliefs of
the Middle Ages, this altarpiece progresses from the Garden of Eden to
a sinful world to Hell. This piece contains more than a thousand
figures as well as exotic wildlife. The right panel notably features a
bird-headed creature. Many of the instruments of torture in the
section depicting Hell are also musical instruments, and the shutters
depict the creation of the world. The titular section is in the center
of this triptych. FTP, name this work of Hieronymus Bosch.          |
{Columbia} University |  Daniel Chester French designed this
location’s alma mater statue on the steps of Low Memorial Library, and
its The Blue and White is an undergraduate magazine. It was the
birthplace of FM radio, and early work on the Manhattan Project took
place in its laboratories. Recently, an African American professor
caused uproar when a noose was found hanging on her door and the
school’s president came under criticism for allowing Mahmoud
Ahmadinejad (Ah- ma-din-jad) to speak at the school. FTP, identify
this Ivy League school located in the Morningside Heights neighborhood
of New York City.      ---|---          | {Commerce} Clause accept
Interstate Commerce Clause before “foreign” |  In Katzenbach v.
McClung, the Supreme Court ruled regulation of Ollie’s Barbecue
constitutional under this provision, in line with its paradoxical
ruling 22 years earlier that subjected wheat grown for personal
consumption to this Constitutional provision as well. A major shift in
jurisprudence however, came in 1995 when the court for the first time
in decades found Congress to have exceeded their mandate in regulating
under, FTP, what clause giving Congress the authority over trade
between states, foreign nations, and Indian tribes.          |
{Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are Dead} |  A number of bizarre events
occur in this play, written to fill in gaps in another, including the
repeated use of a game where only questions may be asked and one of
the two main characters guessing “heads” correctly 76 times in a row.
The two main character’s adventures include meeting a troupe of
players, unwisely opening a letter, and eventually going off on a sea
voyage to meet their death. FTP, name this Tom Stoppard play that ends
in a scene from Hamlet in which an ambassador gives the titular
declaration.          | {Ethan Frome} |  This novel begins with a
narrator in the town of Starkfield during a winter storm who wants to
learn of a tragic event that occurred years earlier. The story that is
then told follows a man who thinks of committing adultery with his
wife’s cousin Mattie Silver when she goes out of town. When his wife
Zeena orders Mattie’s departure, the title character and Mattie
attempt suicide by sled. The narrator is shocked at the end of the
tale to be introduced to Zeena and the crippled Mattie. FTP, name this
novel by Edith Wharton.          | Peter {Stuyvesant} |  A prosthetic
replacing his right leg earned this Dutch Director General of New
Netherland the nickname “Peg leg Pete.” Although he successfully took
New Amsterdam and Delaware, he failed to rally support against the
English invasion in 1664, and spent the rest of his life as a farmer
under English dominance. Name this man who, FTP, was unpopular due to
colonial dissolution with Dutch rule and his strict and deeply
religious practices.          | {Babur} accept {Zahiruddin Muhammad} |
This man’s campaigns in India began with an invasion of the Delhi
Sultanate, under Ibrahim Lodhi. Although Ibrahim had a larger army,
this man possessed firearms, allowing him to prevail at the first
battle of Panipat. He had originally planned to reconquer the
territory occupied by his illustrious ancestor, Timur, but Persia was
too strong for him. Although he had built up an empire stretching to
the Deccan plateau, his son Humayan lost control of it to rebellions.
FTP, identify this first Mughal ruler, whose name means “The Tiger”.
| {Lewis} Acid-Base Theory |  This process can help explain why
nonmetallic oxides form solutions with low pH in water. In this
theory, an adduct is created when the highest occupied molecular
orbital of a molecule donates lone pairs of electrons to the other
molecule's lowest unoccupied molecular orbital through a co-ordinate
covalent bond.  The donating molecule is defined as a base, and the
accepting molecule is an acid.  FTP, name the acid-base theory based
on the exchange of electron pairs, the most broad class of acid-base
definitions.          | {Third of May, 1808}: The Execution of the
Defenders of Madrid |  One story says the artist witnessed the scene
on the hill of Príncipe Pío (PREEN-see-pay PEE-o) from his window, and
hurried up there with a lantern later to sketch it. The result
inspired Manet’s Execution of Maximilian. A large lantern on the
ground illuminates the center of the painting, while the terrified
madrilenos and the soldiers are mostly in shadow. The only fully lit
figure is wearing yellow pants and a white shirt, and is kneeling with
arms outstretched while being shot. FTP, name this Goya masterpiece
showing an execution by Napoleonic soldiers on the namesake date.
| Republic of {Namibia} |  This nation’s Etosha Pan, a seasonal lake,
lies in Ovamboland, in the northern part of this country. Other
regions in it include Kaokoveld, Damaraland, and Great Namaland. Its
Caprivi Strip extends eastward from the rest of this country, and lies
to the north of a neighboring country’s Okavango Delta. The southern
coast of it is known as the Diamond Coast, while the north is called
the Skeleton Coast. Cities in it include Walvis Bay and Windhoek. FTP,
identify this African nation with a namesake desert extending along
its coastline.          | {Moliere} Accept Jean-Baptiste {Poquelin}
before mentioned |  This son of a tapestry artisan joined forces with
Madeleine Bejart to found the Illustrious Theater. Heavily influenced
by Commedia dell Arte, he wrote such comedies as The Precious Maidens
Ridiculed, as well as two plays with complementary school titles.
Other plays concern the cynical title character Alceste and another
titular character who is finally revealed to Orgon as a con man. This
playwright notably collapsed during the fourth performance of another
play and later died, making its title somewhat ironic. Born Jean-
Baptiste Poquelin, FTP, name this French playwright of The
Misanthrope, Tartuffe, and The Imaginary Invalid.          |
{Kristallnacht}or {Crystal Night} or {Night of the Broken Glass} |
This event resulted when a seventeen-year-old attempted an
assassination at an embassy in Paris. Although his original target was
not present at the time, he was able to kill Ernst vom Rath. Orders
released on the fifteenth anniversary of the Beer Hall Putsch called
for the damage and looting of Jewish property. The position of the
government at the time was that these were “spontaneous
demonstrations,” even though this event was planned in advance by
Hitler’s Chief of Propaganda, Goebbels. FTP, name this two-day event
where Germans destroyed Jewish businesses and synagogues.          |
{Prague Spring} prompt on Action Plan before mentioned |  This
movement’s inspiration, the text “2000 Words” by Ludvik Vaculik, urged
people to take control of their lives. In the Bratislava Declaration,
the Soviet Union threatened the occupation that would end this
socialist movement. The Yalta Agreement prevented objectors such as
the U.S. from interfering in the 1968 invasion of Warsaw Pact forces.
Although the eponymous city became the center of occupation, Alexander
Dubcek’s Action Plan is the source of the associated freedoms. FTP,
name this Czech attempt at “Socialism with a human face.”          |
{Paleozoic} Era |  The time period before the start of this geologic
era is known as the Vendian, and did not contain diverse hard-bodied
animals, as this era would. The second period of it ended with a large
mass extinction, although this era is better known for the gigantic
mass extinction at the end of its final period. Characteristic fauna
of the early periods of it included crinoids, brachiopods, and
trilobites, while later on, plants, insects, reptiles, and amphibians
would appear on land. FTP, identify this geologic era including the
Carboniferous, Cambrian, and Permian periods, between the Precambrian
and Mesozoic eras.          | {Pythagoras} |  This Greek, although
most often discussed in the realm of math, was better known during his
time for his philosophies of men, involving the idea of reincarnation.
Around the 500’s BCE, he founded a brotherhood, which emphasized the
importance of faith, but also the need for scientific curiosity. It is
difficult to tell which works of math and science are his, because
many works are signed under him or in thanks to him, and none of the
originals of his works survived. Name this man who, FTP, is best known
for his works with right triangles.          | {The Rite of Spring} or
{Le Sacre du Printemps} |  The successful completion of its premiere
performance was largely due to the efforts of the impresario, Sergei
Diaghilev, and the choreographer, Vaslav Nijinsky. Camille Saint-Saens
walked out on that 1913 premiere of this work of modern music. The
composer claimed that his inspiration came from a fleeting vision of
“sage elders, seated in a circle, watching a young girl dance herself
to death”. Some sources claim that it was the sexually suggestive
dancing and not the harsh dissonance of the music that caused the
famous riot. The revolutionary work depicts a pagan ritual performed
for a specific season. FTP, Name this ballet by Igor Stravinsky.
| {Okonkwo} |  At the age of 18, he threw the Cat in one of the best
wrestling matches in years. When the village oracle ordained that the
boy Ikemefuna must die, he did the deed, even though the boy called
him father. After accidentally killing a boy in the midst of a
ceremony with his gun, he left Umuofia for his mother’s land, where he
was told, “Mother is supreme.” His pride prevented him from heeding
this advice, and on his return argued for war against the whites,
killing a man before hanging himself. FTP, name this tribal leader
from Things Fall Apart.          | Strait of {Hormuz} or Strait of
{Ormuz} |  Islands in this strait include Qeshm, Henjam, and Larak. To
its south is Ras Musandam, a peninsula at the tip of the Ru’us al
Jibal, which is nearly bisected by inlets of this strait. That
peninsula is an exclave of Oman, which also owns most of the navigable
waters in this strait. Iran, however, owns the islands in the north of
the strait. FTP, name this strait connecting the Gulf of Oman with the
Persian Gulf.          | Kilgore {Trout} |  The birth and death dates
of this character change to keep his death in the future. He is
divorced and his only son deserted in Vietnam. In some novels he
appears himself and is important to the story while in others his
works advance the plot. Most of his works were published only in dirty
magazines and include 2BR02B (“To be or not to be”) and The Protocols
of the Elders of Tralfamadore. His son Leon narrates Galapagos and he
appears in Jailbird, Timequake, and God Bless You, Mr. Rosewater,
among several others. FTP, name this fictional author set free in
Breakfast of Champions by his creator Kurt Vonnegut.          |
{Krypton} |  This element was discovered in 1898 by William Ramsey and
Morris Travers, when traces of it remained after they had boiled off
most of the other components of liquefied air. It was long thought to
be inert, but is now known to form several compounds, the most stable
involving fluorine. The spectral lines produced by this gas are orange
and bright green, and in 1960, the orange-red wavelength of this
element’s isotope 86 was used to determine the length of the meter.
FTP, identify this element, a noble gas with atomic number 36 and a
connection with Superman.          | {Shays}’s Rebellion |  This
conflict began due to disillusionment of poor farmers, especially
veterans of the Revolutionary War, over paying heavy taxes to the
state. The namesake leader of the rebellion, an ex-captain, wanted a
moratorium on debt and a moving of the Massachusetts capitol. He led
his allies to block court meetings and debt collection, but was
defeated at Petersham [PEA-terz-ham] Massachusetts. Name this
rebellion, which, FTP, was a major force towards a new US
constitution.          | {Terminal Velocity} |  On Earth, for every
160 meters of altitude, it decreases by one percent, due to the
changing of air density. For humans, the world record is 382 miles per
hour, achieved by making ones body completely vertical, similar to the
way a bird predator dives. Since this value decreases with altitude,
falling objects eventually begin to slow down over time. When drag
force is equal to gravity, it has been reached. FTP, name this
quantity that gives the limit of a speed of a falling object.
| {Jude the Obscure} |  This novel was the author’s last, and after it
he turned back to poetry because of public opinion. At one point in
this novel, the title character attempts a suicide similar to his
mother’s, and unsuccessfully tries to break the ice on a frozen pond
and fall to his death. His ambition is to become a student at
Christminster, but women distract him. His wife Arabella eventually
ceases to interest him and he becomes enamored of Sue Bridehead. His
son, Little Father Time, hangs himself after killing the children the
title character had with Sue. FTP, identify this Thomas Hardy work.
| Republic of {Cuba} |  This nation’s westernmost province is Pinar
del Río. Other notable provinces include Cienfuegos, Camagüey, and
Matanzas. Its only major mountains are the Sierra Maestra, in the
south. There is a large swamp on its Zapata peninsula, to the
southwest of which is the Isla de la Juventud. This island nation is
separated from Hispaniola by the Windward Passage. Its easternmost
province, Guantánamo, is home to a U.S. naval station. FTP, identify
this Caribbean country with a capital of Havana          | Gwen
{Stefani} |  This singer’s only true acting role has been in Martin
Scorsese’s The Aviator as the original blonde bombshell, Jean Harlow.
Soon after her breakup with fellow bandmate Tony Kanal, she met Gavin
Rossdale, whom she would later marry in 2002 and with whom she would
have her only child Kingston. The namesakes of this singer’s fashion
line, L.A.M.B., are the members of her entourage of Harajuku Girls.
FTP, name this singer and fashion designer known for such singles as
Wind It Up, 4 In the Morning, The Sweet Escape, and Hollaback Girl.
| Der {Blaue Reiter} or The {Blue Rider} This art group centered in
Munich was formed in response to a similar group. It included such
artists as Gabrielle Munter and Paul Klee and dissolved at the
beginning of World War I when one founder was deported to Russia and
the German army drafted the other. The Russian painter often used
musical terms in naming his works, and another of his works is the
group’s namesake. He is also credited as the inventor of abstract art.
The German founder’s works include The Yellow Cow. For 10 points, name
this German Expressionist group founded by Franz Marc and Wassily
Kandinsky. {Brownian Motion} |  Today the model can represent
variability in the stock market. Experimental proof for the model came
with Jean Perrin, who used his results to obtain an early experimental
approximation of Avogadro’s number. Einstein used the mathematics of
the model to provide support for the existence of atoms, while the
namesake scientist studied pollen grains in water. FTP, identify this
random motion of particles in fluid, named for the British botanist
Robert.          | {Stimulated Emission} or {LASER} Emission |  This
process requires the active medium to be pumped either electrically or
optically. Each photon pumped into the medium triggers more photons
identical to the trigger photon to be released by the atoms. The
released photons cause a chain reaction among the atoms, releasing
more photons, leading to a huge number of identical photons to be
released in a beam of light. FTP, name this process by which a
concentrated beam of light is generated by an active medium working to
amplify photons.          | {I}nternational {C}ourt of {J}ustice,
accept World Court, do NOT accept International Criminal Court or
International Court |  It is currently led by the British woman
Rosalyn Higgins, and its other 14 members are all representatives of
nations represented in the UN Security Council. It was set up in 1945
and one of its most important early cases was The Republic of
Nicaragua v. the United States, although in modern times the US does
not recognize its jurisdiction. Name this organization, based at The
Peace Palace in The Hague, and, FTP, serves as the Judicial Branch of
the United Nations.          | {Tannhauser} |  The titular character
of this opera has spent a year living with Venus. However, he calls on
the Virgin Mary to return him to earth. He returns home to Wartburg,
where he participates in a singing contest to win the hand of the
beautiful Elizabeth. He is then forced to take a pilgrimage to Rome to
ask for forgiveness after his song shocks the audience, but the pope
tells him he will be forgiven only when the papal staff turns into a
flower. The title character returns to find Elizabeth dead and dies at
her funeral procession as pilgrims enter carrying the pope’s staff,
which has flowered. FTP, name this Richard Wagner opera.          |
{Roots}: The Saga of an American Family |  Disagreement exists as to
whether this novel’s author actually found the village setting of the
beginning. Its primary character works for various positions under the
Waller family until he decides to marry the cook, Bell, who bears the
daughter, Kizzy, meaning “you sit down.” Kizzy’s story then becomes
the central plot, and her lineage is then traced to the author. FTP,
name this “Saga of an American Family” that follows Kunta Kinte’s
lineage by Alex Haley.          | {Mithra}s |  The worshippers of this
deity were divided into seven grades or stages of progressively higher
knowledge in his mysteries, beginning with Corax and ending with
Pater. There are numerous stories about his birth, one of which claims
he was born from the Cosmic Egg. In his youth, he killed the primeval
bull to benefit mankind, and this is celebrated with the tauroctony at
his shrines. FTP, identify this Persian god whose cult was a rival of
Christianity in the Roman Empire, and gained followers particularly
among soldiers.          | Horatio {Alger} Jr. |  This nineteenth
century American writer was a Unitarian minister for two years and
helped manage a newsboy home for thirty years. His fifth children’s
book became his first successful one and the mould for over one
hundred dime novels featuring similar hero characters. Although the
author adapted his namesake hero to Presidents Garfield and Lincoln,
Mark Twain still attacked this man’s “rags to riches” stories,
believing them far too improbable. FTP, identify this author of Ragged
Dick, or Street Life in New York.          | {1984} |  As this novel
opens, the protagonist sees errors in newspaper articles from December
3, December 19, February 14, and March 17, the first of which is the
most egregious as it requires a full rewrite rather than a mere
correction. Neo-Bolshevism and Death-worship are the prominent
ideologies in the two other main powers in the protagonist’s world,
but his home empire of Oceania has been governed for over two decades
by Ingsoc philosophy. FTP, name this dystopian novel, which follows
the attempts of Winston Smith to stand up to the possibly fictitious
figurehead Big Brother.          | Modest {Mussorgsky} |  This
composer’s most famous opera is based on a drama by Alexander Pushkin.
His famous tone poem with a commonly mistranslated title was made
famous by the 1940 Disney film Fantasia. He composed a famous piano
suite which was orchestrated by Maurice Ravel. Most of his works were
prepared for publication posthumously by fellow member of The Five
Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov. FTP, name this Russian composer of Boris
Godunov, Night on Bald Mountain, and Pictures at an Exhibition.
| {Hypha}e |  The oddly named Spitzenkorper is an organelle which
helps produce these long tubules. The generative variety of these
string like filaments are thin and have reproductive abilities, while
the skeletal variety are very thick and cannot reproduce. These tubes,
which are frequently used for absorption from the host by parasitic
fungi, also have septa, which divide them in two. A conglomeration of
these tubules is called a mycelium. FTP, name these root- like
structures which are the primary method of nutrient transport and
absorption in fungi.          | Jules Gabriel {Verne} This author
began his career with a novel detailing Dr. Ferguson’s trip to Africa,
whose focus is to find the source of the Nile and meet with the other
explorers. This author also wrote a work in which the protagonist
reads a note by Saknussemm and travels to a land of giant mushrooms
and mastodons. He penned a novel which sees Aouda rescued with the
help of Passepartout and (*) Phileas Fogg, while in another work, Ned
Land, Conseil, and Professor Aronnax travel with Captain Nemo aboard
the Nautilus. For ten points, name this French author of A Journey to
the Center of the Earth, Around the World in Eighty Days, and Twenty
Thousand Leagues Under the Sea. {Ottoman} Empire In its early stages,
this empire conquered Serbia at the Battle of Kosovo, and this
empire’s existence was officially ended by the Treaty of Lausanne.
Later, it would undergo the Tulip Period and the Tanzimat reforms. It
won at the Battle of Mohacs but was later defeated by the Holy League
at (*) Lepanto, and by Jan Sobieski at Vienna. Skanderbeg and
Alexander Ypsilantis both led rebellions against this empire, which
modernized its army in the “Auspicious Incident.” Leaders of this
empire include ones nicknamed “the Thunderbolt,” “the Grim,” and “the
Magnificent.” For ten points, name this “sick man of Europe,” once
ruled by Suleiman, that conquered Constantinople in 1453 and was
succeeded by modern-day Turkey. {equilateral} or {equiangular}
triangles (prompt on isosceles {triangle}s) Dropping perpendiculars in
this geometric figure leads to Viviani’s Theorem, and Morley’s Theorem
constructs one of these figures. A theorem discovered by Napoleon
Bonaparte states that the centers of some of these shapes form another
one, and the incenter and centroid are the same only in this figure.
The area of one of these (*) polygons is equal to side-length squared
times the square root of three divided by four. A median of this
figure divides it into two 30-60-90 triangles, because it is a regular
polygon which has all 60-degree angles. For ten points, what is this
kind of triangle that has three equal sides and angles? Aaron
{Copland} This man created a three-movement piano sonata while
studying under Rubin Goldmark, and later wrote the film scores to Of
Mice and Men and Our Town. This composer of a Short Symphony wrote a
piece which incorporates folk songs like “Camptown Races” as well as
the title figure’s (*) speeches and letters, while another of his
works for percussion and brass was intended to foster patriotism
during World War II and is now often played at presidential
inaugurations.  This man also composed a ballet score commissioned by
Martha Graham that depicts a celebration of Pennsylvanian pioneers.
For ten points, name this American composer of A Lincoln Portrait,
Appalachian Spring, and Fanfare for the Common Man. Mount
{Kilimanjaro} Treks up this mountain begin at Moschi and proceed up
the Barranco Wall and past the Garden of Senecios. The Rebmann and
Furtwangler Glaciers are located at the top of this mountain. This
mountain was named “Kaiser Wilhelm peak” in 1889 by the first person
to ascend it, Hans Meyer. The Reusch Crater is found within Kibo,
which, along with Mawenzi and Shira, is one of the three cones that
make up this mountain. Not far to west lies Mount Meru, while Mount
(*) Kenya lies 200 miles to the north. Called Uhuru in Swahili, this
is, for ten points, what stratovolcano located in Tanzania, the
tallest mountain in Africa? John {Brown} Henry Thoreau claimed that
this man knew “no more of grammar than one of your calves,” and asks
“When were the good and brave ever in a majority?” This man fought
Henry Pate in the Battle of Black Jack at Palmyra, and he also lost to
John Reid at Osawatomie. A Free State company under this man’s command
received news of the sack of (*) Lawrence two days before they killed
five settlers in the Pottawatomie Massacre. This man is best known for
his defeat by Robert E. Lee’s marines during a 1859 raid on a West
Virginian armory. For 10 points, name this radical abolitionist who
led an unsuccessful raid on Harpers Ferry. {Krishna} In order to
retrieve the Syamantaka Gem, this figure wrestled the bear Jambavan.
This figure also slew the evil Narakasura with his discus, the
Sudarshana Chakra. He lifted Mount Govardhana on his pinky finger for
7 days and 7 nights to shelter the people of Vrindavan from Indra’s
wrath. This god danced on the head of (*) Kaliya to make it leave a
lake which had been poisoned by its venom. His brother, Balarama, is
the son of Rohini and an incarnation of the divine snake, Shesha.
After giving Duryodhana his army, this figure fought on the side of
the Pandavas in the Kurukshetra War, where he served as Arjuna’s
charioteer. For ten points, identify this blue-skinned eighth avatar
of Vishnu who is found in the Mahabharata and the Bhagavad-Gita.
{friction} One constant associated with the “skin” form of this
phenomenon is calculated using the local wall shear stress, fluid
density, and free-stream velocity, while the “stick-slip” model of
this phenomenon is velocity- dependent. This phenomenon is governed by
Amontons’ laws, and the (*) triboelectric effect describes how
electric charge is transferred as a result of this force. Coulomb
developed laws regarding its “dry” form, and this force does no work
on a rolling object. In fluids, this force is called drag, and it
generally converts energy into heat. This force exists in static and
kinetic varieties, and can be calculated by multiplying mu (“mew”)
times the normal force. For ten points, name this force that opposes
motion. {Charlemagne} (Accept {Charles I}, {Charles the Great}, {Karl
de Grosse}, {Carolus Magnus}, or {Charles le Grand}; prompt on
Charles) This ruler established the Palatine School and the system of
missi dominici to oversee his lands. He hired Alcuin of York to
educate his people, and he defeated Desiderius and the Lombards at
Pavia, a feat which was chronicled by his biographer Einhard. His
rearguard was defeated by the Basques at the Battle of (*) Roncevaux
Pass, and he split his territory amongst his three grandsons in the
Treaty of Verdun. Ruling from Aachen, this man was the grandson of
Charles Martel, and Pope Leo III crowned him in the Christmas Day
Mass. For ten points, name this Frankish king, son of Pepin the Short,
who became the Holy Roman Emperor in 800 CE. {Sauron} (accept {Mairon}
before mentioned) This figure convinced Ar-Pharazon to attack Aman,
but the attack failed and his body was destroyed. He changed his name
from Mairon upon leaving Valinor. He was called Gorthaur the Cruel
when he served as Morgoth’s lieutenant during the War of Wrath, and he
later established a stronghold at Dol Goldur. He was opposed by
Elendil and Isuldur in the Siege of Barad-dur, and his defeat by the
Last Alliance marked the end of the Second Age. His army bears the
symbol of his (*) eye, and his servants include the Nazgul. This
figure’s army was defeated at the Pelennor Fields by the forces of
Gondor and Rohan, and he resides in Mordor. For ten points, identify
this master of the One Ring, the chief antagonist of the Lord of the
Rings series. {nucleus} Irregularly shaped compartments of this
organelle which change in response to cellular metabolic activity are
called paraspeckles, and promyelocytic leukemia bodies are often found
in this organelle. The biogenesis of snRNPs [“snurps”] is thought to
be regulated by this organelle’s (*) Cajal bodies, and it can be
visualized through Hoechst and DAPI staining. Movement in and out of
these organelles is regulated by RAN proteins at its namesake pores,
and this organelle is  not found in erythrocytes. This organelle is
surrounded by a namesake “envelope” which is continuous with rough ER,
and it is the site of transcription. For ten points, name this
organelle only found in eukaryotes which contains the nucleolus as
well as the genetic material of the cell. Jean-Jacques {Rousseau} This
philosopher noted that no one who jumps out of a burning building is
accused of committing suicide in a version of his most famous work,
and included descriptions of the sights of Paris in his semi-
autobiographical Reveries of a Solitary Walker. This man contrasted
amour de soi with amour propre in a work which also compares people
who are born stronger with people who fence in plots of land. This
author of Discourse on Inequality described how he would raise and
educate the imaginary title savage in his treatise on (*) education
titled Emile, and also popularized the concept of the general will.
For ten points, which Swiss-French philosopher observed that “man was
born free, and he is everywhere in chains” in On the Social Contract?
{One Thousand and One Nights} (or {Arabian Nights} or{ One Thousand
and One Arabian Nights}) In one part of this work, a fisherman is
allowed to select the manner of his death after opening a jar with the
seal of Solomon on it, and in another part, Morgiana stitches back
together the body of Cassim. In another story from this work, a
mariner finds an island of rocs on one of his (*) seven voyages. The
frame narrative for this collection revolves around Shahryar’s
marriage to his vizier’s wife Scheherazade, which will end with her
execution when she stops telling stories. For ten points, what is this
collection of Arabic folk tales, including “Ali Baba and the Forty
Thieves” and “Sinbad the Sailor?” John Andrew {Boehner} This man
easily won an election against Gregory Jolivette after defeating
incumbent Buz Lukens in a 1990 primary, and this politician is the
only currently-serving member of the Congressional “Gang of Seven.” In
2006, this man defeated John Shadegg and Roy Blunt to fill Tom DeLay’s
vacated position of (*) Majority leader, a position now held by Eric
Cantor, and this Representative from Ohio is notorious for his
tendency to cry sometimes while giving a speech. For ten points,
identify this Republican, who, in 2011, took over for Nancy Pelosi as
the Speaker of the House. Auguste {Rodin} A straw hat sits atop a
young woman’s head in this man’s sculpture of his future wife Rose
Beuret, while another realistic work depicts a Man With a Broken Nose.
This artist depicted three identical men in his unfinished The Three
Shades, while he was accused of casting from a live model for his
realistic statue of nude man with one hand on his head. In addition to
sculpting The (*) Age of Bronze and six men with nooses around their
necks in The Burghers of Calais, this man included a depiction of
Francesca and Paolo kissing in The Gates of Hell. For ten points, name
this artist who sculpted a man with his head on his fist in The
Thinker. {Herakles} (accept {Hercules}) This man killed Eurytus’s son
Iphitus and was punished by being enslaved to Omphale. On his journey
into the Underworld, this figure saved Theseus from the Chair of
Forgetfulness, and he defeated Thanatos to bring Alcestis back from
death. According to one myth, Iolaus was given this man’s wife after
he killed his sons, while in others, he murdered (*) Megara in that
same fit of madness.  This man was himself killed after wearing a
shirt stained with the blood of Nessus. He required the help of his
nephew to accomplish a task that was assigned by this man’s rival
Eurystheus and involved killing a seven- headed creature from Lerna.
For ten points, name this Greek hero who killed the Nemean Lion and
the Hydra as part of his Twelve Labors. Johannes {Kepler} This man
noted that the Platonic solids could be uniquely inscribed in a
sphere, and nested them in his model of the Solar System. This man’s
Mysterium Cosmographicum was the first published defense of the
heliocentric system. One (*) law formulated by this man relates the
square of an object’s orbital period to the cube of its semimajor
axis, and he also hypothesized that the sun was one focus of an
ellipse. The second of his namesake laws states that planets orbiting
the sun sweep out the same area in the same amount of time due to the
conservation of angular momentum. For ten points, name this German
astronomer and assistant to Tycho Brahe who formulated three laws of
planetary motion. {khan} (accept specific names that include the word
“khan,” such as {Chagatai Khan}) One figure with this title was
appointed to enforce the Yassa law code, while another was
instrumental in the massacres at Merv and Nisapur. Besides Chagatai
and Tolui, one man with this title established his capital of Sarai on
the Volga River, and another defeated the Mamluks at Ayn Jalut and
drove the Abbasids from Baghdad. One of these figures destroyed the
(*) Khwarezmian cities of Urgench and Samarkand and established his
capital at Karakorum. The most famous person with this title defeated
the Song dynasty and was visited in his court at Dadu by Marco Polo.
For ten points, name this title given to Mongolian rulers such as
Hulegu, Genghis, and Kublai. {A Farewell to Arms} (accept Lieutenant
Frederic {Henry} before “novel”) After this novel’s protagonist
returns from a horse race with the Meyerses, he comforts his love
interest who claims that “rain is very hard on loving.” In one scene,
the protagonist of this work jumps into a river to escape
interrogation by the battle police while another sees the
protagonist’s convalescence leave revoked after Miss Van Campen
confiscates his alcohol. After arriving at a (*) hospital in Milan,
the protagonist has his knee operated on by Dr. Valentini and is able
to pursue a relationship with nurse Catherine Barkley, who later dies
after giving birth to a stillborn child. For ten points, name this
novel detailing Lieutenant Frederic Henry’s life during WWI as an
ambulance driver, a work by Ernest Hemingway. linear {velocity} (do
not accept or prompt on “angular velocity”) The curl of the field of
this quantity for a fluid is the vorticity. One type of this quantity
is equal in magnitude to the square root of quantity 2 times big G
times M divided by r, and is the value needed to escape an object’s
gravitational pull. The (*) terminal variety of it is reached when the
drag force is equal to the gravitational force, so an object
experiences no acceleration. Its second derivative with respect to
time is jerk, and it is the time-derivative of position. For ten
points, identify this vector quantity from physics, consisting of an
object’s speed and direction. ANSWER:Charles {Cornwallis} (or First
Marquess {Cornwallis}; or Earl {Cornwallis}) This man led British
forces to victory against the Mysorean ruler Tipu Sultan in the Third
Anglo-Mysore War. He negotiated the terms of the Treaty of Amiens,
which he later signed on behalf of Britain with Napoleon, ending the
War of the Second Coalition. In another war, he served under General
William (*) Howe during the campaigns for New York City and
Philadelphia, and he later defeated the army of Horatio Gates at the
Battle of Camden. This commander is most famous for losing a battle in
which Rochambeau and George Washington converged on this man’s outpost
on Chesapeake Bay. For ten points, name this British General whose
surrender at the Battle of Yorktown ended the American Revolution.
{glacier}s (prompt on anything related to ice before mention) The
Glen-Nye law models the relationship between stress and strain in
these entities, and alternating dark and light bands found near the
base of them are called ogives. The firn limit divides these features
into the zone of accumulation and the zone of ablation, and areas with
them can be affected by (*) isostatic rebound when they disappear.
These geologic entities can form ridges called arretes and carve
U-shaped valleys, and they erode surrounding terrain through plucking
and abrasion. They often leave behind deposits of sediment called
drumlins and moraines. Roughly 70% of the Earth’s freshwater is frozen
in, for ten points, what large, slow-moving masses of ice which form
icebergs when they break apart? {cat}s In a novel titled after one of
these animals, Coldmoon grinds a glass ball, and that animal drowns
while praying to Buddha and is owned by Mr. Sneaze. Another literary
one of these animals also drowns after “the slippery verge her feet
beguil’d / She tumbled headlong in.”  In addition to the title
character of a (*) Natsume Soseki novel, and the subject of an “Ode on
the Death of a Favourite” one by Thomas Gray, T.S. Eliot wrote Old
Possum’s Book of Practical these animals. Another one of these animals
slowly disappears but taunts Alice with its grin. For ten points,
identify this animal, one example of which appears “in a hat” in a Dr.
Seuss work. {consciousness} (accept word forms; accept
self-{awareness}, {sentience} or {perception} before mentioned; prompt
on artificial {intelligence} or {mind} before mentioned) David Bohm’s
QM theory attempts to explain this concept through quantum mechanical
phenomena, and Penrose’s argued that it was non-algorithmic in his
critique of artificial intelligence, The Emperor’s New Mind.
Philosophical zombies lack this, and objectivism maintains that
reality exists apart from this concept. Durkheim proposed that totemic
religion created a “collective” type of this concept, while William
James is credited with the idea of a (*) “stream of” this entity. It
is sometimes equated with sentience or self- awareness. For ten
points, name this concept which refers to the ability of the mind to
perceive the world around it, a loss of which is suffered when someone
gets a concussion. {Shinto}ism (or {kami-no-michi}) Inuhariko and
daruma are amulets used in this religion, which uses a ritual called
harai. This religion’s most important ceremony is the Great
Purification, and one figure in this religion once pulled a “grass-
cutting sword” from the Eight-Forked Serpent. The dead in this
religion go to the underworld (*) Yomi, and according to this
religion, the first islands were created when a jeweled spear was
stirred in the oceans by Izanagi and Izanami. Ise Jingu is an
important shrine in this religion, whose deities, referred to as kami,
include Uzume, Susano’o, and Amaterasu. For ten points, identify this
native Japanese religion. {David Copperfield} In this novel, the
protagonist is sent to Mr. Creakle’s Salem House where he meets a boy
who likes drawing skeletons, Tommy Traddles, and James Steerforth, who
later runs off with Peggotty’s niece Little Em’ly. The protagonist of
this novel is sent to London by (*) Murdstone, where he lives with Mr.
Micawber, but runs away to live with his aunt Betsy Trotwood. This
novel’s title character first marries Dora Spenlow and, after she
dies, helps thwart the plotting of the “umble” red-haired Uriah Heep,
securing a marriage to Agnes Wickfield. For ten points, identify this
novel by Charles Dickens. {Attila} the Hun This man defeated
Arnegisclus at the Battle of the Utus, and his successor Ellac was
defeated at the Battle of Nedao by the Ostrogoths. The majority of
knowledge about this man was compiled by the historian Priscus, and
this man gained power after death of Rugila.  He demanded half of Rome
as dowry for Valentinian III’s sister and that sister, Honoria, had
earlier sent this man a ring which prompted his (*) invasion of Italy.
He killed his co-ruler and brother Bleda before losing at the Battle
of Chalons, and he died from a nosebleed on the night of his wedding
to Ildico. Pope Leo I managed to persuade this man not to sack Rome.
For ten points, identify this “Scourge of God,” the most famous leader
of the Huns. Gioachino {Rossini} One of this man’s operas sees the
Pharaoh’s son Amenophis in love with Anaïs, while Musafà plans to
marry off his wife to Lindoro in another. Another work by this
composer of Moses in Egypt and The Italian Girl in Algiers sees the
music teacher bribed to fake illness; that work chronicles Count (*)
Almaviva’s quest for Rosina’s love in an operatic “prequel” to
Mozart’s The Marriage of Figaro. He also depicted Leuthold’s murder of
one of Gessler’s soldiers in an opera that sees the title figure
forced to shoot an apple off of his son’s head. For ten points, name
this Italian composer of The Barber of Seville and William Tell.
magnetic {monopole}s Blas Cabrera may have detected one of these
particles in February of 1982, but those results were never
duplicated, and “spin ice” is very similar to one. Paul Dirac showed
that the existence of these particles implies that electric charge is
quantized, and many grand unified theories suggest their existence.
One of (*) Gauss’s Laws claims that the divergence of a certain field
is zero, meaning that none of these entities exist. For ten points,
identify this hypothetical particle from physics, a magnetic analogue
of a point charge, which is missing either a north or south end.
{Texas} This state had to move its Republican primaries back a month
because it has not yet completed redistricting. One representative
from this state introduced the Protecting Children From Online
Pornographers and Stop Online Piracy Acts, and is named Lamar Smith.
In 2007, this state's governor issued an executive order requiring
girls be (*) vaccinated for HPV, but it was revealed that the vaccine
manufacturer Merck had contributed to his campaign. A Libertarian from
this state is currently in the Republican nomination race. For ten
points, name this state home to Ron Paul and Rick Perry. {Ming}
dynasty This dynasty saw the rule of the Zhengtong Emperor, who was
defeated and captured by Mongols in the Tumu Crisis. It was forced to
stop naval trade because wokou pirates swarmed its coastline. This
dynasty saw the visit of the Jesuit priest Matteo Ricci, and its last
emperor decided to hang himself on a tree behind the Forbidden City
before Li Zicheng’s rebellion succeeded. Its founder, the (*) Hongwu
Emperor, rose to power in the Red Turban Rebellion, and under Yongle
this dynasty moved its capital to Beijing. This dynasty saw voyages of
the eunuch Zheng He and the introduction of porcelain. For ten points,
name this Chinese dynasty that was overthrown by the Manchus and ruled
between the Yuan and the Qing. {Catch-22} In this novel, one
character’s legs wash up on the beach after being killed by McWatt,
and another character wears an eye patch after a lecherous old man
threw a flower at his eye. Besides Kid Sampson and Major de Coverley,
characters in this novel include the atheistic Dunbar, who is
“disappeared” by army officials, and Nurse Duckett. (*) Doc Daneeka’s
wife receives insurance benefits after her husband’s supposed death,
and the black-market Syndicate is created by Milo Minderbinder. The
protagonist goes naked in front of Colonel Cathcart  after he is
unable to save Snowden in, for ten points, what  World War II novel
featuring the bombardier Yossarian, a work by Joseph Heller? Frank
Lloyd {Wright} Sliding wooden walls are seen in this man’s Hanna-
Honeycomb House, while a copper roof and hexagonal skylights are found
in his Kentuck Knob. This artist had a carport in his Rosenbaum House,
which exemplified his Usonian design. One of his more famous buildings
survived a 1923 (*) earthquake, and utilizes the “Maya-Revival” style.
That work is the Imperial Hotel in Tokyo, and this architect’s Robie
House exemplifies his Prairie Style. For ten points, name this
architect of the Guggenheim Museum in New York and of Edgar Kaufmann’s
house over Bear Run River, Fallingwater. {transcription} (do not
accept or prompt on “translation” or “replication”) This process can
be terminated through a palindromic G-C rich hairpin loop or by a
protein factor designated “Rho.” In bacteria, this process can be
initiated by a sigma factor, while in eukaryotes, it generally begins
after TFIID binds to the TATA box. Unlike a similar process, this does
not form Okazaki fragments because only the 3’ strand is used, and the
(*) reverse of this process is used by retroviruses like HIV.
Spliceosomes remove introns following this process, during which
polymerase adds complementary nucleotides and replaces thymine with
uracil. For ten points, name this process in which mRNA is synthesized
from a DNA template, sometimes contrasted with translation. The {Count
of Monte Cristo} (or Le {Comte de Monte-Cristo}) One character in this
work refuses to eat a grape offered to him. Jacopo offers to help the
protagonist after he fakes an injury, but he declines so that he may
search for the treasure of the Spada family. The title character
prevents Maximilien from committing suicide, just he had done with
Maximilien’s father (*) Morrel, before vanishing with Haydee. Fernand
Mondego marries Mercedes and Danglars becomes a successful banker
after falsely accusing the title character of treason. For ten points,
identify this novel in which Edmond Dantes gets his revenge, a work of
Alexandre Dumas. {Columbia} River One structure that lies along this
river is the plutonium-producing Hanford Site. The city of Astoria
lies near this river’s mouth, and this river flows past Golden and
Invermere. “Fish-ladders” help salmon cross this river’s numerous
hydroelectric dams, which include John Jay and Bonneville. The Yakima
River joins this river at Tri-Cities, while  Franklin Delano Roosevelt
Lake is formed by the (*) Grand Coulee Dam on this river. This river
is joined by the Willamette at Portland, while its largest tributary
goes through Hell’s Canyon and is called the Snake. For ten points,
name this river which lies on the border between Washington and
Oregon. Field Marshal Erwin {Rommel} (accept “The {Desert Fox}” before
mentioned) This man won a Blue Max for single-handedly capturing an
Italian division at the Battle of Caporetto. He later commanded the
7th Panzer Division in opposition to the Allied invasion of Normandy.
He committed suicide after he was linked to the 20 July Plot, which
was a failed attempt to plant a bomb in the Wolf’s Lair to assassinate
Adolf Hitler. At the Battle of (*) Kasserine Pass, this figure
defeated Allied forces participating in Operation Torch, but lost to
them at El Alamein. For ten points, name this German Field Marshal
during World War II, whose leadership of the German Afrikakorps during
the North African campaign earned him the nickname “The Desert Fox.”
{Two} Bertrand’s Postulate claims that there is always a prime between
a positive integer and this number times that integer. The Euler
characteristic of planar graphs and polyhedra is this number, meaning
the number of faces plus vertices minus (*) edges is this number. An
n-dimensional cube has this number to the power of n vertices, and
Mersenne primes are one less than a power of it. This is the largest
number equal to its own factorial, and the square root of this integer
is the hypotenuse of an isosceles right triangle with side length one.
For ten points, what is this only even prime number? {Set}h (accept
{Set}esh or {Set}ukh) Like Anubis, this god’s symbol is a Was scepter,
and he engaged in a swimming race with his nephew in the form of a
hippopotamus. This figure’s main center of worship was at the Hyksos
city of Avaris, and with the war goddess Neith, this figure fathered
the crocodile god Sobek. This god lost a (*) boat race when he was
tricked into sailing a boat made out of stone, and he was tricked into
eating lettuce after assaulting his nephew. He is said to help Ra
defeat the serpent Apophis each night, and was the husband of Nepthys.
For ten points, name this son of Geb and Nut and Egyptian god of the
desert, a rival of Horus who chopped his brother Osiris into fourteen
pieces. Ernest {Rutherford} This man was the first to formulate the
concept of a “half-life” and also coined the terms “alpha”, “beta”,
and “gamma” rays to describe the types of radiation given off by
thorium and radium. He also confirmed Prout’s hypothesis after
successfully knocking a hydrogen nucleus out of a nitrogen atom, but
he may be better known for an experiment with Geiger and Marsden
involving a (*) zinc sulfide sheet which lit up when alpha particles
were deflected onto it. That experiment lead him to conclude that the
atom was mostly empty space with a dense nucleus, replacing J. J.
Thompson’s plum pudding model. For ten points, name this British
chemist famous for carrying out the gold-foil experiment. {Mali}
Empire According to legend, one ruler of this empire sent a fleet of
200 ships to explore the Atlantic, none of which returned. It was
originally governed by the Gbara, and it grew out of the state of
Kangaba. A general of this empire named Sagmandia captured Gao, while
al-Saheli designed its university at (*) Sankore. Malinke stories tell
of how this empire’s founder shot a magic arrow into his adversary’s
eye at the Battle of Kirina, thus defeating the Sosso king Sumanguru.
That founder, Sundiata, established his capital at Niani. The most
famous ruler of this empire inflated the price of gold in Cairo while
on his hajj. For ten points, name this West African empire which
shares its name with a modern-day country and was led by Mansa Musa
from Timbuktu. {cell}s This term describes the basic unit of flash
memory, and Rayleigh-Bénard convection sees the formation of these in
a different context. In meteorology, the wind belts around Earth are
organized into three circulation types of these entities called the
Ferrel, Polar, and Hadley ones. (*) Photovoltaic ones are used in
solar panels, and most batteries can be referred to as dry ones of
these. Living entities with this designation were first observed by
Robert Hooke and Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, and can be classified as
prokaryotic and eukaryotic. Controversy has risen regarding the use of
stem ones in cloning. For ten points, name this term which is most
commonly used in biology to designate the smallest functional unit of
life. Marc {Chagall} (accept {Paris Through the Window} before
mentioned) A cat-like creature in the center and a two-faced head in
the lower right can be seen in this man’s Paris Through the Window. In
another of his paintings, a man in dark blue puts his arms around a
tall woman wearing red and white while a goat holds a violin. This
artist of La Mariee created a work depicting himself with black and
white eyes painting a red creature on a canvas, and another in which a
(*) synagogue burns in the upper right. In addition to The White
Crucifixion and Self Portrait With Seven Fingers, this artist painted
an inverted violinist, two upside-down houses, and a man feeding a
goat a flower. For ten points, name this Russian painter of I and the
Village. John {Locke} This philosopher claimed that mathematics
instills “a habit of reasoning closely and in train” in a work which
also argues that those who know a smattering of everything are far
from attaining truth. This author of On the Conduct of the
Understanding also argued that having a variety of religious groups
helps prevent civil unrest but condemned Roman Catholics and atheists
in A (*) Letter Concerning Toleration. This thinker postulated that
the role of government was to protect its people’s natural rights of
life, liberty, and property and claimed that the mind was a “tabula
rasa” in An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. For ten points, name
this English Enlightenment philosopher who discussed the social
contract in his Two Treatises of Government. {Things Fall Apart} In a
sequel to this work, Clara Okeke becomes pregnant, causing Obi to
accept bribes to help pay for an abortion. The protagonist of this
novel beats his wife Ojiugo during the Week of Peace and strikes the
fatal blow on his adopted son (*) Ikemefuna. That protagonist is
exiled for seven years after his gun accidentally goes off, and he
hangs himself after killing a white messenger. The prequel to No
Longer at Ease is, for ten points, what novel about Okonkwo’s
struggles in colonial Nigeria, the most famous work of Chinua Achebe?
Michael {Faraday} This man’s ice pail experiment demonstrated that
charge in an electrically conducting body rests entirely on the
surface. This discoverer of benzene coined the term diamagnetism, and
in his namesake effect, a polarized beam of light is rotated by
application of a similarly-aligned magnetic field. An external
electric field can be cancelled out using his namesake (*) “cage,”
and, using his iron ring-coil, he found that a changing current in one
wire would create a current in one nearby. For ten points, identify
this British physicist and namesake of the SI unit for capacitance who
discovered electromagnetic induction. The {Tin Drum} (or Die
{Blechtrommel}) The protagonist of this work forms a band with Klepp
and Scholle, which plays at the Onion Cellar, where one may go to peel
onions and cry. The protagonist’s lover Roswitha is killed during
D-Day, and one character who may be the protagonist’s father is killed
while defending the Polish Post Office. His other possible father
chokes to death on a (*) Nazi pin, and the protagonist of this work
has a scream that can break glass. This work’s protagonist is sent to
an asylum after the death of Sister Dorothea, and he decides to stop
growing at the age of three. For ten points, identify this novel about
Oskar Matzerath and the title instrument, a work by Gunter Grass.
{Moses} or {Moshe} (or {Musa}; or {Moseh}) At one battle, Hur and this
man’s brother helped him keep his arms aloft, and this man stuck a
brass serpent on a pole to cure his followers of snake bites. During
his exile after committing murder, this man married Zipporah, and this
man smashed two stone tablets when he saw the worship of a (*) golden
calf. This man, rescued from a river as a baby, returned to his home
after he communicated with a burning bush. Passover celebrates this
man leading his people through the Red Sea after the death of some
first-born children, the last of the Ten Plagues. For ten points, name
this prophet, who received the Ten Commandments and led the Israelites
out of Egypt. {French Revolution} (accept the {Tennis Court Oath}
before “Commune” is read) The Great Fear and the October Days occurred
in the lead-up to this event, whose organizers included Emmanuel-
Joseph Sieyes. The Commune was set up to protest a constitution
written during this event, which also saw the passage of an act that
required bishops and priests to swear a loyalty oath. Besides passing
the Civil Constitution of the Clergy, this period saw the murder of
one leader by Charlotte (*) Corday. The Estates-General broke apart
following the Tennis Court Oath, which preceded this event. The
storming of the Bastille marked the beginning of it, and one period
during it was known as the “Reign of Terror”. For ten points, name
this event which saw the rise of Jean-Paul Marat and Maximilien
Robespierre and the overthrow of the French monarchy. {Buenos Aires}
This city’s Tres de Febrero Park can be found in its neighborhood of
Palermo. This city’s Plaza de Mayo sits near the Casa Rosada, the seat
of its country’s government. Other distinctive neighborhoods in this
city include San Telmo and La Boca, which sits at the mouth of the
Riachuelo River.  The Obelisk lies in the middle of this city’s
Avenida Nueve de Julio, which is sometimes called the (*) “widest
avenue in the world.” The residents of this city are called porteños,
and this city sits on the confluence of the Parana River and the Rio
de la Plata. For ten points, name this second largest city in South
America, the capital of Argentina. {Hadrian} (or Publius Aelius
Trajanus {Hadrian}us Augustus) This man executed his early political
enemies Gaius Avidius Nigrinus and Lucius Quietus and he constructed a
villa at Tivoli. He was protected by his military advisor Marcius
Turbo and by his secret police, the frumentarii. A cult was created
for his drowned lover Antinous, and he married Vibia Sabina at the
behest of his predecessor’s wife Pompeia Plotina. An uprising led by
(*) Akiba ben Joseph led this man to suppress the Bar Kokhba Revolt in
Judaea. He rebuilt the Pantheon and he outlived his appointed
successor Lucius Aelius, prompting him to appoint Antoninus Pius as
his successor instead. For ten points, identify this Roman emperor who
succeeded Trajan and built a namesake wall across Britain.
{distillation} (accept {vacuum distillation} before “Teflon”) One
variety of this technique utilizes a short-path apparatus called a
Kugelrohr (KOO-gehl-roar). Teflon flaps are used in another apparatus,
a Perkin triangle, to perform this technique on air-sensitive
materials. The pressure-swing type of this process is used on
azeotropic mixtures, while the vacuum type of this process reduces the
ambient pressure until it drops below the (*) vapor pressure. When
component parts boil at less than 25 degrees Celsius from each other,
such as for crude oil, the fractional type of this technique is
employed. Often applied to air, alcoholic beverages, and seawater,
this is, for ten points, what technique whereby components of a
mixture are separated based on their boiling points? A {Clockwork
Orange} In a shack labeled “home”, the protagonist of this work
discovers a manuscript which shares its title with this novel, and he
listens to music by Otto Skadelig before leaping out a window. He
frequently drinks liquid laced with drugs such as Synthemesc, Vellocet
and Drencrom at the (*) Korova milkbar with Dim, Pete, and George. The
protagonist also enjoys classical music in this work, particularly
fond of “Lovely Ludwig Van,” and he fantasizes about ultra-violence,
which leads him to flee to F. Alexander after undergoing treatment by
the Ludovico Technique. For ten points, name this dystopian novel
about the Nadsat-speaking Alex and his “droogs”, a work of Anthony
Burgess. {Apollo} Coronis cheated on this god with Ischys, and this
god raped Creusa to father Ion. This deity instructed Orestes to
avenge Agamemnon’s death, and he served King Admetus as a slave for
killing the Cyclopes. One son of this god was the beekeeper Aristaeus,
and this god mourned the death of his lover (*) Hyacinthus after
Zephyrus killed him with a discus. Zeus struck down another son of
this god who had brought Hippolytus back to life; that son was the
renowned healer Asclepius. The dragon Python was killed by this son of
Leto, who then established the Oracle of Delphi.  For ten points, name
this Greek god of light and medicine, the twin brother of Artemis.
Admiral {Ackbar} This commander was invited back to his old job by
Sien Sow, after which he defeated Tsavong Lah during the Yuuzhan Vong
invasion. After his rescue from enslavement under the hands of
Willhuff Tarkin, Mon Mothma was able to secure an alliance between the
Rebellion and the (*) Mon Calamari people with his help, and he was
present during the decisive Battle of Endor during which he commanded
the Rebel Fleet from his flagship, Home One. For ten points, name this
famed admiral of the Rebel Alliance who, upon realizing that the
seemingly vulnerable Death Star II was in fact armed, shouted, “It’s a
Trap!” Gustav {Mahler} This man’s first substantial composition was a
cantata titled Das klagende Lied, and the adagietto movement of his
fifth symphony is scored for string orchestra and harp. He also
created a song cycle based on poems of Friedrich Rückert called Songs
on the Death of Children. This man incorporated an earlier funeral
march, Totenfeier,  into his second symphony, (*) Resurrection. One
performance of this composer’s eighth symphony involved 1068
musicians, and his first symphony features a solo bass playing a minor
version of Frère Jacques. For ten points, name this German composer of
the Symphony of a Thousand and the Titan Symphony. {leaf} (accept
{leaves}) Venation of these structures can be classified as
craspedodromous and camptodromous, and trichomes are hair-like
appendages on these structures. Stipules can be found near the base of
these structures. Their sessile types lack a petiole, and a layer of
cylindrical cells called the (*) palisade layer can be found above the
spongy layer in these structures. Large, divided types of these
structures are called fronds, and those of monocots generally have
parallel veins. Transpiration occurs through pores called stomata on
the underside of these features, which are usually green due to the
chlorophyll in their mesophyll. Petals are modified forms of, for ten
points, which part of a plant that is found on the stem? {rectangle}s
(prompt on {quadrilateral}, {trapezoid}, or {parallelogram}, do not
accept or prompt rhombus or square) The British Flag Theorem deals
with sums of squares of distances from an interior point in this
figure. Cutting a square off the “golden” variety of this figure
yields another “golden” one, and gluing two opposite edges of this
figure after giving it a half-twist yields a (*) Mobius strip. This
figure’s diagonal has length equal to the square root of the sum of
the squares of its two perpendicular sides, a consequence of all of
its angles being right. For ten points, name this type of
quadrilateral which has four 90-degree angles, whose area is equal to
its base times its height. {Spanish-American} War In one incident
during this war, Henry Glass commanded the USS Charleston in capturing
a small Pacific island. The victors of this war put down the Moro
Rebellions, and this war saw “Fighting Joe” Wheeler storm Las
Guasimas.  It was caused in part by reports about the atrocities of
(*) “Butcher” Weyler, and the one side in this war passed the Teller
Amendment afterwards. This war saw an attempt to capture Santiago, and
it was widely publicized by Hearst and Pulitzer’s use of “yellow
journalism.” During this war, George Dewey captured Manila Bay and
battles occurred at Kettle and San Juan Hills. For ten points,
identify this “splendid little war” which was sparked by the sinking
of the USS Maine. The{ Call of the Wild} The protagonist of this novel
is accompanied by Dave and Sol-leks while working for a pair of
Canadian mail carriers on a trip to Dawson. After being starved by
Mercedes and Charles, the main character gets rescued before his
comrades fall into a lake. Later on, he helps John Thornton win a bet
by pulling a 1000 pound (*) sled out of the ice, but retreats from
civilization after his master is killed by a group of Yeehat Indians.
The protagonist kills Spitz to gain control of the sled team in, for
ten points, what novel about the dog Buck and his adventures in Alaska
during the Yukon Gold Rush, a work of Jack London? {Gaia} (accept
{Gaea} and {Gea}, do not accept “Terra”) This figure turned her son
Aristaios into a dung beetle so that he could avoid the wrath of Zeus.
She became the grandmother of Medusa through her children Phorcys and
Ceto. This mother of the Melian nymphs also had a son by Poseidon,
Antaeus, who could not be harmed as long as he (*) touched this deity.
The monstrous dragon Campe guarded some of her sons in Tartarus, while
some other of  her sons tried to take over Olympus in the
Gigantomachy. With Tartarus, she was the mother of the monster Typhon.
For ten points, name this Greek primordial earth mother who gave birth
to Uranus. {Candide}, ou l’Optimisme (or {Candide}: or, Optimism) A
scholar in this work is awarded a sheep after demonstrating that its
wool was red by A plus B, minus C, divided by Z. This work sees Don
Issachar thrown on a dung pile after he is killed by the title
character, who escapes the cannibalistic Biglugs with his valet,
Cacambo. One character in this work, a daughter of Pope Urban X, had a
buttock cut off to feed some starving men, while another character is
hanged after an (*) earthquake in Lisbon. The title character of this
work is banished from the castle of the Baron Thunder-ten- Tronckh
after he kisses Cunégonde, and his mentor believes that the current
world is the “best of all possible worlds.” For ten points, name this
satirical novel whose characters include the optimistic Pangloss,
written by Voltaire. {Fenrir }(accept {Fenrisulfr}, the {Fenris} wolf,
{Hroovitnir}, or {Vanagandr}) An image of this figure swallowing
someone else is carved on Thorwald’s Cross, and the river Van was
created from his saliva. He managed to break Laeding and Dromi before
the dwarves made an object from things like the roots of a mountain
and the footsteps of a cat. This son of the giantess Angrboda fathered
Skoll and Hati, two children who will eventually (*) eat the Sun and
Moon. This creature’s mouth is ripped open with a leather shoe by
Vidar for killing Odin at Ragnarok, and he bit off the right hand of
Tyr after being unable to break the chain Gleipnir. For ten points,
name this son of Loki, a monstrous wolf in Norse mythology. {March on
Washington} for Jobs and Freedom (prompt generously, on things like
“Martin Luther King giving the I Have a Dream speech”) The logistics
of this event were administered by Bayard Rustin, and James Farmer and
Roy Wilkins were other leaders of this event. An address by John Lewis
at this event criticized the Kennedy administration, and Malcolm X
condemned this event in his “Message to the Grass Roots” speech,
calling it a circus that lost its militancy. The most famous speech
given at this event criticized America for defaulting on a (*)
promissory note and claims that “[they] will not be satisfied until
justice rolls down like waters and righteousness like a mighty
stream.” For ten points, identify this 1963 rally for civil rights
that saw Martin Luther King Jr. present his “I Have a Dream” speech.
{neutron}s The electron dipole moment of this particle is at most
three times ten to the negative 26th, and would violate CPT-symmetry
if it is non-zero. This particle has a half-life of 881 seconds, and
can break up into a proton, an electron and an electron antineutrino
via beta decay. This particle is composed of one (*) up and two down
quarks, and nuclear fission is initiated by the bombardment of this
particle. The number of this particle dictates what isotope an atom
is, and they have mass roughly equal to that of a proton. James
Chadwick discovered, for ten points, what particle found in the
nucleus, which, as its name suggests, has a net charge of zero?
{Charlie} (accept also {Charlie} the Unicorn 3 or {Charlie} Bit My
Finger) In one work with this name in the title, the protagonist’s
companions take “evasive maneuvers” to avoid Narshlogs, and a goat-
seal sings to the title character before he walks through The Door to
help make a snowman. That work is a sequel to one in which a character
with this name becomes covered with splinters after his blue and pink
friends get directions from a magical (*) Liopleurodon. Another
character of this name is told “that really hurt!” in a British accent
after chewing on his brother Harry. One character of this name’s
kidney is stolen after a trip to Candy Mountain.  For ten points, give
this name shared by two characters in popular Youtube videos, such as
a unicorn and a child who “Bit My Finger.” {Alaska} This state’s
Chichagof Island and Prince of Wales Island are part of the Alexander
Archipelago located off its southeastern coast, and this state also
controls St. Lawrence Island.  The Unorganized Borough covers more
than half of this state. This state’s city of Barrow is located on the
Beaufort Sea, and this state contains the Brooks and Wrangell mountain
ranges. This state’s city of (*) Nome lies on Norton Sound, and an oil
pipeline connects Prudhoe Bay to Valdez. This state contains Kodiak
Island, and the islands Attu and Kiska, which were invaded during
World War II, are part of its Aleutian Islands. Its cities include
Fairbanks, Anchorage, and its capital, Juneau. For ten points, name
this northernmost and largest US state. George {Washington} In one
work titled after this man, Mercury gives Robert Morris a bag of gold,
Minerva stands beside an electric generator, and Ceres sits on a
McCormick reaper. In that work, this title figure sits enthroned above
a depiction of Freedom wearing a red, white, and blue helmet.
Constantino Brumidi painted a fresco in the Capitol about this man’s
(*) Apotheosis, and a painting of him was defaced when a picture of
the 9/11 attacks was glued to it. In that painting of this figure, a
man in green kicks aside a chunk of ice, while many boats full of
horses and Revolutionary soldiers row onward in the background. For
ten points, identify this man whom Emanuel Leutze painted Crossing the
Delaware on his way to the Battle of Trenton. {Crimea}n War This war’s
naval battles of Kinburn and Sinope saw some of the first uses of
ironclad warships. This war ended not long after the Omar Pasha led
the Siege of Kars, and it began with Allied victories at Alma and
Inkerman. French forces then trapped the Black Sea fleet during the
Siege of (*) Sevastopol. The “Lady with the Lamp,” Florence
Nightingale, was a nurse in this war, which saw a disastrous cavalry
charge at the Battle of Balaclava. For ten points, identify this major
European war which was ended by the 1856 Treaty of Paris and was named
after the Ukrainian peninsula on which most of the fighting occurred.
{retina} (accept {macula} and {fovea} until mention; prompt on {eye}
before mentioned) This structure does not function correctly in those
with Stargardt disease, and certain cells in the capillaries of this
structure can cause Scheerer’s phenomenon. Müller glial cells found in
this structure can dedifferentiate into multipotent progenitor cells,
and Tay-Sachs disease is often diagnosed by a red spot on it. This
structure receives oxygen from the choroid coat, which separates it
from the (*) sclera. This structure’s most sensitive region is the
fovea, which is located at the center of its macula. Vitamin A is
necessary for the function of this structure, which has a “blind spot”
where it connects to the optical nerve. Rods and cones are found in,
for ten points, which inner layer of the eye that sends optical
signals to the brain? William Cuthbert {Faulkner} In one of this
author’s works, a man kills McEachern with a chair after he calls
Bobbie a harlot, while in another work, the title character murders
Homer Barron with arsenic and then sleeps next to his corpse. This
author of “A (*) Rose for Emily” also wrote a novel in which a
character looking for Lucas Burch meets Byron Bunch, and that work
about Lena Grove sees Joanna Burden murdered, possibly by Joe
Christmas. Another of his works tells the tale of Quentin and Benjy
Compson and is set in Yoknapatawpha County. For ten points, name this
American author of Light in August and The Sound and the Fury. {nine}
This number is the larger of the two perfect powers mentioned in the
Catalan Conjecture. According to the k equals three case of Waring’s
Problem, every integer can be written as a sum of at most this many
cubes. Though it’s not three, the difference between a number and a
rearrangement of its digits will always be divisible by this number,
and a given number is divisible by this number if repeatedly summing
its digits eventually yields this number. This is the smallest number
with (*) three odd factors, a consequence of it being the square of an
odd prime number. For ten points, identify this number equal to three
squared. {Nickel} (accept {Ni} before read) Garnierite is a common
rock containing this element, and a technique for extracting it
involves reacting this element’s oxide with a mixture of carbon
monoxide and hydrogen gas to form its tetracarbonyl. This element’s
isotope-62 has the highest binding energy per nucleon of any isotope
for any element, and one alloy of this element is the primary
constituent in a hydrogenation catalyst  named for Raney which is used
in the (*) Mond process. This element forms austensitic stainless
steel when combined with chromium in an iron alloy, and it’s commonly
found with cadmium or its hydride in rechargeable batteries. For ten
points, name this element with atomic number 28 and chemical symbol
Ni. Sigmund Schlomo {Freud} Like Ernst Jentsch, this man analyzed
E.T.A. Hoffman’s “The Sandman”, to formulate his concept of “The
Uncanny,” and argues in another work that the title character must
have been a follower of Akhenaten. In addition to Moses and
Monotheism, he described the “oceanic” feeling in a work that analyzes
the tensions between individuals and their environment; that work is
(*) Civilization and Its Discontents. This man described the “death
drive” and the struggle between Eros and Thanatos in Beyond the
Pleasure Principle, while his most famous work separates the id, ego,
and superego. For ten points, name this Austrian psychologist that
founded psychoanalysis and authored The Interpretation of Dreams.
Jorge Francisco Isidoro Luis {Borges} Acevedo In one of this man’s
work, an Irishman explains to the author that he received the title
scar after betraying John Vincent Moon, while in another, the title
character is able to give the exact time of day after being thrown
from a horse. In addition to “The Shape of the Sword” and (*) “Funes
the Memorious,” which are found in his collection Artifices, this man
wrote a story about the title group of hexagonal rooms, which contains
every book ever written, and another story about a point from which
one can see everything in the universe. For ten points, identify this
Argentine author whose Ficciones includes stories like “The Libary of
Babel,” “The Aleph,” and “The Garden of Forking Paths.” {Sepoy}
Revolt/Mutiny (accept {Indian} Rebellion of {1857} until mentioned; or
{India}’s First War of {Independence}; or {Great Rebellion}; or
{Indian Mutiny}; always obvious equivalents of “Revolt”) During this
event, William Hodson killed three princes at the Bloody Gate, and one
cause of this event was the annexation of Awadh due to Lord
Dalhousie’s “Doctrine of Lapse.” This conflict saw battles at Kanpur
and Jhansi, and during this conflict Henry Havelock and Colin Campbell
managed to relieve the siege on Lucknow, where Henry Lawrence had
previously died. One side in this conflict was aided by Bahadur Shah
II, the last (*) Mughal emperor. Another cause of this event was the
use of ammunition lubricated with pork and beef fat, which insulted
the native Muslim and Hindu population. For ten points, identify this
1857 event in which Indian soldiers rebelled against the British East
India Company. {recursive} function (accept {recursion} and other word
forms) Edsger Dijkstra [DIGE - stra] used this technique in his depth-
first solution of the N queens problem, and a predictive parser uses
this technique without backtracking. Bottom-up dynamic programming
involves the use of these functions, the multi-branched type of which
is used by divide and conquer algorithms. Its tail type reduces space
requirements because it avoids adding new stack frames, and the (*)
Tower of Hanoi problem can be solved with this technique. The
factorial of n can be found with this technique by multiplying n by n
minus one until the function reaches its base case. Fibonacci numbers
are generated by, for ten points, which type of function which calls
itself repeatedly? Islamic Republic of {Pakistan} The prime minister
of this nation said that he had “no other option but to accept the
will of the people” when discussing national sovereignty. American
relations with this country deteriorated after a November attack from
Shamsi airbase killed its soldiers near the (*) Khyber Pass. Rick
Perry called into question this non-NATO member’s receipt of $50
billion in aid this year to limit the activities of the Haqqani
network and for flood relief. For ten points, name this country whose
current president is Asif Zardari and which is in dispute with India
over the territory of Kashmir. {Alfred the Great} (or {Alfred I};
prompt on “Alfred”) This ruler built a network of burhs and created
the fyrd system in order to repel Viking attacks. Bishop Asser served
as the biographer of this ruler, who won the Battles of Ashdown and
Chippenham. He collected his law code in the Doom Book, and he signed
the Treaty of Wedmore, which established the borders of the (*)
Danelaw. At the Battle of Eddington, this ruler defeated the Danes
under Guthrum, and he translated Latin works such as Consolation of
Philosophy into English. For ten points, identify this English king of
Wessex, the only English king to earn the epithet “the Great.” {Shiva}
(Accept {Siva}) This god sits on a tiger-skin, demonstrating how he
has conquered lust, at the top of Mount Kailash in the Himalayas. This
deity holds a trident in one hand to symbolize his power and is
garlanded by a snake, which denotes his wisdom. He was nicknamed
Nilkanth, meaning (*) “blue throat,” after he drank the Halahala, a
poison in the Ocean of Milk.  His third eye believed to burn all
desire, or Kama, to ashes, and he is the father of Kartikeya and
Ganesha. For ten points, name this wife of Parvati, a member of the
Hindu Trinity along with Vishnu and Brahma, the god of destruction.
Robert Louis {Stevenson} This author wrote a poem in which he tells
Leerie to “see a little child and nod to him to-night!” That poem,
“The Lamplighter,” was published as part of this author’s collection A
Child’s Garden of Verses. This man wrote about Dick Shelton’s desire
to rescue his love Joanna with help from the title fellowship in The
Black Arrow. In another of his novels, Ransome and Captain Hoseason
take (*) David Balfour aboard the Covenant. This author is better
known for a work in which Gabriel Utterson investigates the title
physician’s transformation into his evil self and a novel detailing
the travels of Captain Smollett, Jim Hawkins, and Long John Silver in
their search for the title locale. For ten points, name this Scottish
author of Kidnapped, The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, and
Treasure Island. {spring} The first of Richard Strauss’s Four Last
Songs is named after this entity, and the last of Edvard Grieg’s opus
43 is a lyric piece dedicated to this. Johann Strauss Jr. wrote a
waltz for orchestra and solo soprano entitled “Voices of” this, and
Jean Sibelius’s Improvisation for Orchestra was subtitled “The Sadness
of” this. Ludwig van Beethoven’s fifth violin sonata is nicknamed
this, and Frederick Delius used a clarinet to portray the title bird
in his tone poem titled On Hearing the First Cuckoo in this.
Schumann’s (*) first symphony is nicknamed this, and riots broke out
following the 1913 premiere of Igor Stravinsky’s The Rite of this. The
first concerto in Antonio Vivaldi’s The Four Seasons is named after,
for ten points, which season that is followed by summer? Samuel Taylor
{Coleridge} One of this author’s works tells his child that is
“cradled by my side” that he “shalt wander like a breeze” and that
“all seasons shall be sweet to thee.” Another of his works exclaims
“Joy, Lady! is the spirit and the power” after he is unable to “see,
not feel how beautiful they are.” This author of “Frost at Midnight”
and “Dejection: An Ode” wrote a more famous work which mentions (*)
“Alph, the sacred river” flowing “Through caverns measureless to man.”
That work begins with an order for “A Stately Pleasure-Dome”, while
another work by this poet cries “Water, water, everywhere, Nor any
drop to drink,” after the speaker kills an albatross. For ten points,
name this English poet of “Kubla Khan” and “The Rime of the Ancient
Mariner.” {moment} of inertia One theorem states that this quantity
with respect to a line normal to a given plane is equal to the sum of
it with respect to two perpendicular lines on that plane. This
quantity for a solid sphere is equal to two-fifths times mass times
radius-squared. The Huygens-Steiner theorem states that this quantity
about a certain line is equal to it at the center plus mass times
distances squared, and is sometimes called the (*) parallel-axis
theorem. Rotational kinetic energy is equal to one-half times this
quantity times angular velocity squared, and this quantity times mass
is equal to angular momentum. For ten points, identify this rotational
analogue of mass, a measure of a body’s resistance to changes in its
rotation. War of the {Spanish Succession} Louis Boufflers and Claude
de Villars lost the Battle of Malplaquet during ths war, and the
Treaties of Baden and Rastatt partially ended this war. The signing of
the Asiento was one result of this war, which later precipitated the
War of the Quadruple Alliance. Queen Anne’s War was an extension of
this war, and during this war, the Battle of Ramillies was won by the
Duke of (*) Marlborough, who also won at the Battle of Blenheim. This
war began after the Bourbon Philip V inherited the throne of a certain
country from Charles II. For ten points, name this early eighteenth
century war which was ended by the Treaty of Utrecht and was fought
over the throne of a certain Iberian country. The {Good Earth} One
character in this novel dies insisting that “beauty will not bear a
man sons.” This work’s protagonist marries a woman whose servant is
Cuckoo, but stops loving the concubine Lotus after she insults his
mentally retarded daughter. While in the city, protagonist gains great
wealth by looting a wealthy man’s house, enabling him to escape from
life as a (*) rickshaw-puller and buy land from the House of Hwang,
which had formerly employed his wife. Ending with the protagonist’s
sons’ decision to split up his land is, for ten points, what novel
about Chinese farmer Wang Lang and his dutiful wife O-Lan, a work of
Pearl Buck? Pierre de {Fermat} (accept {triangular numbers} or
{polygonal number} theorem before mentioned) One of this man’s results
is a generalization of Gauss’s “Eureka” Theorem, which proved that
every integer can be written as a sum of three triangular numbers.
Numbers like 561 and 1105 give false positives for his namesake
primality test; those numbers are Carmichael numbers. That test is
based on this man’s theorem that a to the power of p is congruent to a
modulo p. However, he is most famous for a result the proof of which
the (*) “margin [was] too narrow to contain.” That theorem claims
there are no non-trivial solutions to the equation a to the n plus b
to the n equals c to the n for n greater than two. For ten points,
identify this French mathematician, whose work with primes led to his
“little theorem” and whose “Last Theorem” was finally proven by Andrew
Wiles. Elder Scrolls V: {Skyrim} (accept {Elder Scrolls V} before
mentioned, prompt on {Elder Scrolls}) One quest in this game has the
player follow Barbas, a talking dog, to reunite it with its master,
and another quest in this game can be offered by speaking to Commander
Maro after killing Astrid. One object in this game is taken by “a
friend” after the player goes to Ustengrav to recover the Horn of
Jurgen Windcaller. The events of this game begin with an execution at
(*) Helgen, and finding word-walls increases the capabilities of the
player’s Thu’um. Guards in this game claim to have been adventurers,
until each of them had the misfortune of taking an arrow to the knee.
This game is titled after the northernmost region of Tamriel, where
the Dovahkiin learns shouts to defeat Alduin and other dragons. For
ten points, identify this follow-up to Oblivion, the fifth game in the
Elder Scrolls franchise. {fish} (or specific fish such as “whale,”
“salmon,” etc.) A pair of the golden-colored ones of these creatures
is one of the Eight Auspicious Signs of Buddhism. This creature is
exemplified by the first avatar of Vishnu, Matsya. One of these
creatures ate nine hazelnuts from the Well of Wisdom before being
eaten by Finn McCool, and Jesus (*)  fed 5000 people with only five
loaves of bread and two of these creatures. After avoiding preaching
in Nineveh, the prophet Jonah was swallowed by one of these creatures,
and the Ichthys, or the “Jesus” type of this creature, is a symbol for
Christianity. For ten points, identify these animals that swim around
in the water. volcanic {eruptions} (prompt on volcano) Categories of
items created by these events include lapilli and “bombs,” and can be
more generally referred to as tephra. These events can cause the
formation of lahars, which are composed of swiftly flowing mud and
pyroclastic debris. The (*) phreatic type of this event primarily
produces steam, while the Plinian type results in a column of gas and
ash and ejects large amounts of pumice. Occurring constantly at the
Hawaiian Mauna Loa, for ten points, what are these events, which have
occurred at Mount Vesuvius and Mount St. Helens, often resulting in a
flow of lava? Jean-Louis André Théodore {Géricault} This artist
depicted a group of four galloping horses with impossibly outstretched
legs on a grassy field in a painting dedicated to Adam Elmore. Another
of his paintings shows a Napoleonic soldier with widened eyes holding
a curved sword while seated on a white horse. In addition to painting
Derby at Epsom and The (*) Charging Chasseur, this artist is most
famous for a work depicting a man pointing below him in while
surrounded by dead bodies scattered around the survivors of a
shipwreck off the coast of Mauritania. For ten points, name this
French painter of The Raft of the Medusa. {Holocaust} (or {Shoah},
prompt on World War II) One action during it is described in a novel
narrated by Stingo, and that novel ends with the suicide of Nathan
Landau.Novels set during this time period include Fatelessness and
Kaddish for an Unborn Child, both of which were written by Imre
Kertesz. In another novel set during this period, the title character
bribes Amon Goeth and takes the advice of (*) Itzhak Stern. In
addition to Sophie’s Choice, it is the setting of a work which
consists of entries addressed to Kitty until that author was taken to
Bergen-Belsen. For ten points, identify this event in 20th century
Germany, the setting of such works as Elie Wiesel’s Night, Schindler’s
List and The Diary of Anne Frank. {Tamerlane} (or {Timur} the Lame; or
{Tamburlaine}; or {Timur} Lenk; or {Timur}-e Lang) This ruler won the
Battle of Balkh, and his tomb was discovered by Mikhail Gerasimov.
This ruler destroyed Sarai and Astrakhan after he was betrayed by
Tokhtamysh’s Golden Horde, and this man’s son Shah Rukh helped him
defeat Bayezid I at the Battle of Ankara. He died before he could
fulfill his plans of conquering (*) China. He sacked Delhi in 1398,
and after conquering Damascus and Baghdad, he allegedly built a
pyramid with his enemy’s skulls. His descendant Babur later founded
the Mughal Empire. For ten points, identify this crippled Central
Asian conqueror who ruled from Samarkand. Henry Rene Albert Guy de
{Maupassant} This man wrote a novel in which Gerome Roland’s sons are
left a large inheritance by Leon Marechal, and another novel in which
Mademoiselles Walter and Forestier are taken advantage of by the
ruthless George Duroy. This author of Pierre et Jean and (*) Bel Ami
wrote a story in which Rachel murders a German officer. In another
work, the prostitute Elizabeth Rousset is convinced that she must
sleep with a Prussian officer. In addition to Mademoiselle Fifi and
Boule de Suif, this author wrote a story in which Mathilde Loisel
loses the title object, only to find out it was fake. For ten points,
name this French author of “The Necklace.” {justice} (accept
distributive {justice} before “Hume”) Robert Nozick argues that
requirements for this concept are not satisfied by end-result and
pattern principles in Anarchy, State, and Utopia, while Hume defined
it as an artificial virtue. One philosopher claimed that this idea can
only be achieved in society through a “difference principle,” which is
established by placing people behind a (*) “veil of ignorance.” John
Rawls equated this concept with fairness in a work titled A Theory of
this, and Plato argued against a description of this concept as “the
advantage of the stronger” in The Republic. Hobbes claimed that this
concept does not exist in the state of nature. For ten points, name
this philosophical concept, often associated with the court system and
a blind woman carrying a scale. {Penn}sylvania {State} University
Louis Freeh is currently conducting an investigation into an event
that occurred at this institution, and as a result of that situation,
Graham Spanier, the president of this institution, was forced to
resign.  An official at this institution was accused by Mike McQueary
(*), although that official then went on TV to claim that it was “just
horseplay.” One person at this institution ran the “Second Mile”
charity, and this school distanced themselves from him in the wake of
a November 2011 scandal. For ten points, name this university which
fired Joe Paterno after reports surfaced of a Jerry Sandusky child
sexual abuse scandal. {ammonia} (accept {NH3} before read) This
compound catalyzes a reaction between table salt, carbon dioxide, and
water in the Solvay process, while Tollens’ reagent is composed of an
aqueous solution of this compound with silver (I) nitrate. This
compound turns yellow in the presence of Nessler’s reagent. This
compound is reacted with oxygen gas in the (*) Ostwald process, and an
iron catalyst is used in a reaction between nitrogen and hydrogen gas
to produce this compound, a process pioneered by Fritz Haber.
Accumulation of this compound in cells can cause a rise in pH, so many
organisms convert it into urea before excretion. The simplest amine
is, for ten points, what weak base with chemical formula NH3? {Boxer}
Rebellion (accept equivalents like {Boxer} Uprising; or {Society of
Righteous and Harmonious Fists} Rebellion before mention; or
{Righteous Harmony Society} Rebellion before “society”) One side in
this event launched the Gaselee and Seymour Expeditions, while the
other side was aided by the Kansu Braves. This event was preceded by a
failed coup called the Hundred Days’ Reform, and during this event,
Ronglu besieged the Legation Quarters.  Forty missionaries were killed
in the Taiyuan Massacre during this event, and it was a response to
the “unequal treaties.” One side in this event was opposed by the (*)
Eight-Nation Alliance and supported by the Empress Dowager Cixi. That
side was led by the Society of Righteous and Harmonious Fists. For ten
points, identify this 1899-1901 anti- foreigner rebellion with
occurred in China. Giuseppi {Verdi} One opera by this man chronicles
the plight of the Jews under the title Babylonian king, and includes
the chorus Va, pensiero, also known as the “Hebrew Slave Chorus.”
Another work by this composer of (*) Nabucco which is based on a play
by Alexandre Dumas includes the duet “Un di, Felice, eterea” and
depicts the rivalry between Baron Douphol and Alfredo Germont for the
love of Violetta Valéry. This man also included a “Grand March” and
the aria O patra mia in an opera about an enslaved Ethiopian princess,
while his opera about a hunchbacked court jester features the tenor
aria “La donna è mobile.” For ten points, name this Italian composer
of La traviata, Aida, and Rigoletto. Republic of {Ecuador} This
country’s El Oriente region is the source of the source of the Napo
and Putumayo rivers. The port cities of Manta and Esmeraldas lie on
the western coast of this country, which also controls the Floreana
and Isabela Islands. Mountains in this country include Tungurahua,
Illiniza, and Pichincha. The Charles Darwin Research Station is
located in this country, and its second highest peak is (*) Cotopaxi.
The farthest point from the center of the earth, Chimborazo, is
located in this country, which saw a 1822 meeting between Jose de San
Martin and Simon Bolivar in Guayaquil. Along with Chile, it is one of
only two South American countries that do not have a border with
Brazil. For ten points, name this country which controls the Galapagos
Islands and has its capital at Quito. {Trojan }War (accept {Siege} of
{Troy} and all reasonable equivalents) The conclusion of this event
was brought about thanks to the deception of Sinon, and the first
person to die in it was Protesilaus. During this event, one man traded
his bronze armor for Glaucus’ golden set. This event was ended by a
device designed by Epeius. Poseidon sank the fleet of one side’s
commander and stranded his brother in Egypt because (*) Ajax the
Lesser raped Cassandra at the conclusion of this event. This conflict
saw Neoptolemus kill King Priam, and it began after Menelaus’ wife was
abducted from Sparta. For ten points, name this nine-year long
conflict which ended with the Greek conquest of a Dardanian city, made
possible by a wooden horse supposedly offered as a gift. Robert
{Burns} One of this author’s songs notes that the “lads had no good
will / That day their neighbors’ blood to spill” and was written after
the Battle of Sherrifmuir. In another of this author’s poems, the
title character gets drunk and sees the Devil dancing at (*) Alloway
Kirk. He also wrote one poem about a small creature’s “wee-bit housie”
which was merely a “heap of leaves and stibble;” that poem is about
the title “tim’rous beastie.” This poet of Tam O’ Shanter discussed
“the best laid plans of mice and men” in “To a Mouse,” but is best
known for a poem typically sung at New Year’s. For ten points,
identify this Scottish author of Auld Lang Syne. {Marbury} v. Madison
Calder v. Bull extended the results of this case to state
legislatures, while a previous law discussed in this case gave the
Supreme Court jurisdiction over petitions for writs of mandamus. The
Chief Justice initially favored the plaintiff, who was from his
political party, but ultimately rested his decision on the power of
the (*) Supremacy Clause over an Act passed by Congress. It began when
Thomas Jefferson’s Secretary of State refused to deliver appointments
to John Adam’s “Midnight Judges,” and led to the Judiciary Act of 1789
being declared unconstitutional. For ten points, identify this
landmark Supreme Court case decided by John Marshall, which
established judicial review. {echinodermata} (accept {echinoderms})
Some members of this phylum possess pincer-like pedicellariae, and
those species also possess a madreporite plate and a ring canal. A
calcium carbonate material called stereom forms skeletal plates in
organisms of this phylum, some members of which possess spines and a
mouth called “Aristotle’s Lantern”. Classes in this phylum include (*)
crinoidea and asteroidea, and members of it possess a water vascular
system and tube feet for locomotion. Adult members of this phylum
typically exhibit five-way radial symmetry. For ten points, name this
phylum of animals that includes sea urchins and starfish. Émile
François {Zola} This author wrote a work in which George Hugon shouts
praise to the title dancer at a performance of The Blond Venus, while
in another of his works, Laurent and the title character kill Camille.
This author also wrote a work in which Etienne is interested in
Chaval’s relationship with Catherine; he included that work along with
(*) Nana and Therese Raquin in his Rougon- Macquart series. This
author of Germinal accused the French government of anti-Semitism in
an open letter. For ten points, name this author who defended Alfred
Dreyfus in J’Accuse!. Saul {Bellow} This author wrote a novel in which
Albert Corde accompanies his wife Minna to Romania and finds out about
her mother’s death. Another of his works was based on this author’s
relationship with Delmore Schwartz and tells the tale of aspiring
writer Charlie Citrine. In addition to The Dean’s December and (*)
Humboldt’s Gift, this author wrote a novel in which the title
character divorces Madeleine after she has an affair with Valentine
Gersbach but wants to regain custory of Junie, and another novel about
the title character who is “an American, Chicago born.” For ten
points, name this Jewish-American author of The Adventures of Augie
March and Herzog. Nelson Rolihlahla {Mandela} This figure is known for
wearing “Madiba shirts,” and as president he supported the Springboks
and lobbied for the Lockerbie trial to occur in his country. He gave
the “I am Prepared to Die” speech during the Rivonia trial after he
was arrested for leading the (*) Spear of the Nation. This leader, who
was succeeded in his highest position by Thabo Mbeki, wrote his
autobiography Long Walk to Freedom while imprisoned at Robben Island,
but was released in 1990 by F.W. de Klerk, with whom this man received
the Nobel Peace Prize three years later for their efforts to end
apartheid. For ten points, name this former South African president.
David Émile {Durkheim} This author defined the title concept as
“relative to sacred things” that are set apart and forbidden and
argued that emotional security leads to the development of religion in
The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life. Another work by this
thinker defines the field of sociology as one that analyzes “social
facts”, while another of his works differentiates (*) mechanical and
organic solidarity. In addition to writing The Rules of the
Sociological Method and Division of Labour in Society, he concluded
that a greater “social control” amongst Catholics decreased their
chances of the title action. For ten points, name this French
sociologist that divided the title phenomenon into altruistic,
fatalistic, egoistic, and anomic types in Suicide. {Facebook}.com This
organization’s founder began it after being charged by the
administrative board of his school for breaching Internet security,
and Dustin Moskovitz took on coding responsibilities after being made
senior vice president of programming for this organization. Eduardo
(*) Saverin was the first CFO and business manager of this
organization before being replaced by Sean Parker, and it was
initially built to be exclusively for Harvard students. In 2005, “the”
was dropped from its domain name and it now has over 750 million
active users. For ten points, name this  website that uses the
timeline feature to display users’ profiles, a social networking
website created by Mark Zuckerberg. Sir William Gerald {Golding} In
one novel by this man, a dispute between Reverend Colley and Captain
Anderson is resolved by the narrator Edmund Talbot. That novel is part
of his To the Ends of the Earth trilogy and is entitled Rites of
Passage. This man is more famous for a novel in which Sam and Eric
discover a downed fighter pilot whom they mistake for a (*) Beast, and
that novel sees Simon and Piggy killed by the fighting between Jack
and Ralph’s tribes. For ten points, identify this author who wrote
about some marooned English schoolboys in Lord of the Flies. {Seneca
Falls} Convention Horace Greeley wrote that this event was “but the
assertion of a natural right,” and the ninth resolution presented at
this event led one of its members to exclaim that “thee will make
[them] ridiculous.” At the urging of Garrison and Phillips, the two
leaders of this event traveled to London to attend the first World’s
(*) Anti-Slavery Convention, where they were only allowed to listen in
the gallery. This event saw speeches given by Frederick Douglass and
Elizabeth Cady Stanton, both of whom urged Lucretia Mott to include a
call for suffrage in the Declaration of Sentiments. For ten points,
identify this 1848 conference that took place in a namesake New York
village and called for women’s rights. {Yom Kippur} (or {Day of
Atonement}) This event’s tradition of kaparot involves swinging either
money or a live chicken around one’s head before giving it to charity.
The Ne’ila concludes this holiday, and all services on this holiday
begin with a prayer which has historically been incorrectly used as
proof that Jews do not keep promises, the (*) Kol Nidre. It is
forbidden to bathe and to wear leather or perfume on this holiday.
This holiday falls on the tenth of Tishrei, and is the second of its
religion’s “High Holy Days.” For ten points, identify this holiday
which occurs nine days after Rosh Hashanah, a fast day on which Jews
repent for their sins. {bacteria} or {bacterium} (prompt on
{streptococcus} before “nitrogen”) Along with mice, one type of these
organisms was used by Oswald Avery and Colin MacLeod to suggest that
DNA was the main vehicle of heredity. They can exchange genetic
material through a pilus in a process called conjugation, and can also
incorporate exogenous DNA through transformation. Roots of legumes
often have (*) nitrogen-fixing types of these organisms. Ones with
peptidoglycan in their cell wall appear violet after Gram staining,
and their cyano- type was misidentified as blue-green algae. They do
not have a nucleus, and contain circular chromosomes called plasmids.
For ten points, name these prokaryotic micro-organisms, such as E.
coli, which can also cause diseases like cholera. {Hungary} One king
of this country won at the Battle of Breadfield with his Black Army,
and this country lost most of its territory in the Treaty of Trianon.
This country was defeated by Otto the Great at the Battle of Lechfeld,
and it also saw a 1848 revolution led by Lajos (*) Kossuth. Rulers of
this country included Matthias Corvinus and John Hunyadi, as well as
the Arpad founder of this country, Saint Stephen. This country was
ruled by Janos Kadar after Soviet tanks crushed a 1956 revolution in
it led by Imre Nagy (NAHJ). Before World War I, this country was part
of a joint monarchy with Austria. For ten points, identify this home
country of the Magyars with capital at Budapest. Lake {Michigan} The
Old Mission Peninsula divides this body of water’s Grand Traverse Bay
in two. This body of water contains the Manitou Islands and the Beaver
Islands, and the Muskegon River flows into it. Lake Winnebago is
connected to this body of water by the Fox River, and this body of
water is drained by the Straits of (*) Mackinac (MACK-kuh-naw). The
Door Peninsula and the Upper Peninsula separate this lake from its
largest inlet, Green Bay. Cities that lie on this lake include
Milwaukee and Chicago. For ten points, identify this Great Lake which
drains into Lake Huron and borders its namesake state to the east. {Le
Chatelier's} principle The van’t Hoff equation applies this concept to
thermodynamics, which explains why raising temperature will reduce the
amount of product in the Haber process. This statement explains why
dissociating sodium acetate along with acetic acid will suppress the
ionization of acetic acid and increase the pH of the (*) buffer
solution, supporting the common-ion effect. According to this
principle, adding a noble gas does not result in a shift, and this
principle also explains why the addition of more reactant will tip a
reaction towards the product side. For 10 points, identify this
principle which states that an equilibrium will shift to accommodate
any changes, named for a French chemist. {Journey to the West} (accept
{Xi You Ji}; accept {Monkey}) One scene from this work sees the main
characters stop in front of a burning mountain, which can only be put
out by a fan made from banana leaves. After eating sacred baby fruits,
one character fights a skeletal demon and is later banished by his
master. This work begins with the main character emerging out of a
rock, who soon gains the ability to shift into 72 different forms and
obtains a golden rod capable of changing size at will. Later on, that
character tries to overthrow the (*) Jade Emperor and pees in the
Buddha’s hand, only to be crushed under a mountain and rescued by
Xuanzang. Accompanied by Friar Sand, Pig, and the Monkey King, for ten
points, identify this Wu Cheng’en work about a monk making the title
pilgrimage to retrieve Buddhist scriptures, one of China’s Four Great
Classics. Mike {Krzyzewski} (pronounced “kruh-SHEF-ski,” be lenient,
also accept Coach {K}) From 1966 to 1969, this man played basketball
under Bob Knight at Army, a team he would later coach from 1975-1980
before switching to the school he is most commonly associated with.
Along with Pat Summitt, Sports Illustrated named this man “2011
Sportsman of the Year.” He has a 35-1 record with the US National
Team, including gold medals at the 2008 Summer Olympics and 2010 FIBA
World Championship. Upon defeating Michigan State in November 2011, he
secured his (*) 903rd career win as a head coach, surpassing the
record previously held by Bob Knight. Known for winning four NCAA
Championships coaching at Cameron Indoor Stadium, for ten points, name
this head basketball coach of the Duke Blue Devils. {Visigoths}
(prompt on “Goths” before “Ostrogoths”) While ruled by Reccared I,
these people converted from Arianism to Catholocism. This group
collapsed after Roderic was killed at the Battle of Guadalete.
Toulouse served as an early capital for these people, whose rulers
often came from the Balti dynasty. Their kingdom in Gaul was defeated
at the Battle of Vouille by Clovis I, after which this group moved
their capital to Toledo and ruled over most of Hispania. One ruler of
this group died at the (*) Catalaunian Plains. For ten points, name
this Germanic group, led at times by Theodoric I and Alaric I, that
sacked Rome in 410 AD, often contrasted with the Ostrogoths. Franz
Joseph {Haydn} This man composed a comic opera for Johann Joseph Felix
Kurz titled The Lame Devil, and included the “How do you Do?” and
“Joke” quartets in his “Russian” quartets. His “Quinten” quartet is
one of his “Erdödy” quartets, and this composer of the “Sun” quartets
also wrote an oratorio based on Paradise Lost and the Book of Genesis
which depicts the beginning of the world, titled (*) The Creation. His
Symphony No. 45 was premiered by Prince Nikolaus Esterházy’s
orchestra, and ends with only two muted violinists on stage, while his
Symphony No. 94, the symphony “with the kettledrum stroke,” features
an unexpected fortissimo chord. For ten points, name this Austrian
composer whose London Symphonies include ones nicknamed Farewell and
Surprise. {Sirius} A (prompt on {Alpha Canis Major} or {Dog Star}
before mention) The Ancient Egyptians based their calendar on the
heliacal rising of this body, which was known to them as Sothis. The
existence of this body’s dimmer companion, discovered by Alvan Clark,
was predicted by Friedrich Bessel using observations of this body’s
“wobble”; that companion is a white dwarf which forms a (*) binary
star system with this star.  This star forms the winter triangle along
with Betelgeuse [BEE - tle - juice] and Procyon [PRO - see - on], and
it is also the alpha star of the constellation Canis Major. For ten
points, name this brightest star in the night sky, sometimes nicknamed
the “Dog Star.” Les {Miserables} (accept The {Miserable Ones}) In this
work, Magnon receives money from Gillenormand and is falsely accused
of taking part in the Gorbeau Robbery. The protagonist of this work
does not return a coin given to him by Petit Gervais, and this work
sees Mabeauf join the Friends of the ABC. Eponine saves a character by
sacrificing her own life, and Gavroche Thenardier dies when he
attempts to retrieve cartridges in this novel. Marius falls in love
with (*) Fantine’s daughter Cosette, and the antagonist of this work
drowns himself in the Seine River after spending many years chasing a
man who had stolen a loaf of bread. For ten points, name this novel
about Inspector Javert and Jean Valjean, a work of Victor Hugo. {Ra}
(or Atum-{Ra}, or Amun-{Ra}, or {Ra}-Horakhty before mentioned, accept
{Re} in place of “Ra” at all times, prompt on Atum, Amun, or Horakhty)
One of this god’s possessions changes from a Madjet to a Semektet
daily, and this ancestor of all nine members of the Ennead was
sometimes symbolized by the Bennu phoenix. This figure mixed some red
beer and used it to pacify a bloodthirsty Sekhmet. This god was cured
of a snakebite by Isis after he gave her the (*) secret name hidden in
his body. Akhenaten replaced this deity’s syncretization with the
worship of Aten, and one of his epithets, Horakhty, means “Horus of
the Horizons”. This god rides a solar barque each night and had a
center of worship at Heliopolis. For ten points, name this falcon-
headed Egyptian god of the Sun. {asterisk}s (prompt on {star} or
similar) In genetics, this symbol is added after the main haplogroup
to represent a paragroup. In chemistry, two of these symbols indicate
when the polarization function is added to a basis set, while one of
them can denote an antibonding molecular orbital. Though not a bar,
this symbol can denote the complex conjugate of a matrix. In C and
C++, this symbol is used to declare a pointer variable, while in Ruby
and Python, two of these symbols are used to express (*) exponents. It
denotes a wildcard character in Unix,  and this symbol can be used
after a forward slash to begin block comments in most programming
languages. On a normal keyboard, shift-8 yields, for ten points, which
symbol that looks like a star and is often used as a multiplication
sign? {white} (accept any titles like The {White} Plague/Disease, The
Lair of the {White} Worm, {White} Jacket, The Woman in {White},
{White} Noise, and “The {White} Man’s Burden, or {Bila} Nemoc, Capek’s
original language title) In one novel with this adjective in the
title, The Marshal is stricken with the title illness and not cured by
Dr. Galen, while another sees Arabella March face off with Adam
Salton, who uses dynamite to destroy the title creature. In addition
to a Karel Capek novel about a plague of this type, and Bram Stoker’s
The Lair of the [this] Worm, this color describes the jacket of a
sailor on the Neversink in a Melville work and a woman in a (*) Wilkie
Collins novel, as well as titling a novel about Jack Gladney, a
professor of Hitler Studies. For ten points, identify this color which
accompanies “Noise” in the title of a Don DeLillo work, the color of a
man whose burden was discussed by Rudyard Kipling. {ethanol} (accept
{ethyl alcohol}; prompt on "alcohol") Johann Lowitz  first obtained
the “pure” type of this compound by filtering its distilled form
through activated charcoal. Toxins such as pyridine and naphtha are
agents added to make the “denatured” variety of this substance, while
the “absolute” variety of this substance can be obtained by using a
small quantity of (*) benzene. In the presence of a phosphoric acid
catalyst, this compound is formed by the hydration of ethylene, and
its most common application is as a biofuel additive for gasoline. A
byproduct of yeast cells undergoing fermentation, for ten points, name
this compound with formula C2H5OH that is commonly found in liquor.
{Boston Tea Party} Benjamin Rush’s “seeds of slavery” speech led to
this event, and a congregation took place at the Old South Meeting
House prior to this event, because Faneuil Hall was too small.
Governor Thomas Hutchinson’s refusal to let the Dartmouth leave
without paying duties was the primary cause of this event, while
Britain passed the (*) Intolerable Acts in response to this event. For
ten points, identify this event coordinated by the Sons of Liberty in
which a group of Massachusetts colonists disguised as Mohawk Indians
boarded three vessels and dumped the namesake product into the harbor.
{pragmatism} One essay that laid the foundation for this school of
thought  used the dichotomy between musical notes and rests to
distinguish between things we are “immediately” and “mediately”
conscious of and also discusses three grades of clearness of
conception. One work titled after this movement distinguishes between
tough and tender-minded philosophers and discusses whether a man
chasing a (*) squirrel around a tree goes around the squirrel or not.
Other works written by proponents of this philosophical tradition
include “How to Make Our Ideas Clear” and Democracy and Education. For
ten points, name this school of thought championed by C. S. Peirce,
John Dewey, and William James which focuses on linking hypotheses to
their “practical consequences.” John Singleton {Copley} This man
painted a grey-haired, smirking man with his index finger in a book
looking at his wife in Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Mifflin. Another of his
works sees a group of mostly left-facing soldiers in red, and a large
British flag held in front of smoke; that work is The Death of Major
Peirson. This man portrayed his half-brother Henry Pelham holding a
gold chain in (*) Boy With a Squirrel, and painted a portrait of Paul
Revere. He is most famous for depicting a naked blond boy struggling
for his life while a man in Havana Harbor attempts to spear the title
creature to death. For ten points, name this American artist of Watson
and the Shark. {Maxwell’s Demon} Raizen, Muga, and Ruschhaupt’s
“single-photon cooling” is the closest it is possible to get to this
entity, and Rolf Landauer’s refutation of this idea argues that
information cannot be stored indefinitely, leading him to the
conclusion reached earlier by Leo Szilard. The most famous disproof of
it claims that it would have to (*) expend energy to measure speeds
and sort particles, preventing entropy from decreasing. For ten
points, identify this physics thought experiment in which the Second
Law of Thermodynamics would be violated by its namesake creature. Anne
{Bradstreet} This poet wrote about a contest between “fire, air, earth
and water” to see “which was the strongest, noblest and the best”.
Another of this author’s works ends by telling the reader, “The World
no longer let me love/ the world and treasure lies above” and the
title event occurs “In a silent night when rest I took”. In addition
to “The Four Elements” and (*) “Verses Upon the Burning of our House”
this poet wrote “thou ill-formed offspring of my feeble brain” and
that “If ever two were one, then surely we” in a larger poetry
collection. For ten points, name this seventeenth-century American
female poet who included her poems “To My Dear and Loving Husband” and
“The Author to her Book” in her collection, The Tenth Muse Lately
Sprung Up in America. {Noah} (or {Noe}; or {Noyach}) The Baha’i Faith
places this figure’s descendants as spiritually greater than everyone
else and claims that he lived for 950 years. This son of Lamech cursed
his grandson Canaan to be the “lowest of slaves” because Canaan’s
father caught this figure naked. This figure has been compared to the
Greek mythological figure (*) Deucalion, who was also given an olive
branch by a messenger pigeon. This father of Japheth, Shem, and Ham
was well-known for a Rainbow Covenant, which protected all animals,
that occurred on Mount Ararat. For ten points, name this biblical
figure who survived a flood by sailing for 40 days and 40 nights on an
ark. {Sargon} I (or {Sargon} the Great; or {Sargon} of Akkad) In
retribution for attacking Subartu, a deity supposedly cursed this
ruler’s people with famine. This figure defeated Lugalzagesi after
rising to power in Kish, and he later appointed Rumish as his
successor. This ruler grew up as a (*) cupbearer to the king Ur-Zababa
before he revolted and became the king himself, and his daughter
Enheduanna became a High Priestess to the moon god Nanna. This man,
who gained the loyalty of his soldiers by eating with them daily,
conquered various Sumerian city-states in the 23rd and 22nd centuries
BC. For ten points, name this supposed inspiration for Nimrod in the
Bible, a war-loving ruler of Akkad. {Robinson} {Crusoe} (accept either
underlined portion) One rarely-included chapter in a novel about this
man details his fight with wolves while transporting his wealth
through the Pyrenees. This man was captured by Moorish pirates but
escapes with the boy Xury, finding his way to Brazil where he owns a
plantation. This man labels a land close to the Orinoco River as “The
Island of Despair” before meeting a group of (*) cannibals that eat
other humans for strength. This man’s story was based on that of
Alexander Selkirk, and he teaches one of the cannibals, Friday, how to
speak English. For ten points, name this fictional castaway described
in a Daniel Defoe novel. Battle of the {Bulge} (accept the {Ardennes}
Offensive before mentioned) Men involved in this battle asked each
other who Mickie Mouse’s girlfriend was after the aggressors of this
battle infiltrated enemy ranks and sabotaged progress in Operation
Greif. In this battle, the Peipers, after capturing an enemy unit of
150 men, murdered 84 of them in an event known as the (*) Malmedy
Massacre. The instigators of this offensive met fierce resistance in
the city of Bastogne from a small force led by Brigadier General
McAuliffe, who, when asked to surrender, cried “Nuts!” before being
relieved by General Patton’s Third Army. For ten points, name this
last German offensive in the Ardennes, in which Adolf Hitler attempted
to recapture Antwerp. Islamic Republic of {Iran} The eastern portion
of this country contains the Dasht-e-Kavir and Dasht-e-Lut deserts.
This country contains the Khuzestan Plain, and Mt. Damavand is found
in its Alborz Mountains. Its city of Bandar-e-Abbas lies on a strait
that transports a third of the world’s seaborne oil shipments. The (*)
Zagros Mountains are located in this country which was home to the
ancient cities of Ecbatana and Persepolis. Modern-day cities in this
country include Tabriz and Esfahan, and, like Oman, it abuts the
Strait of Hormuz. This country is bordered by the Caspian Sea to the
north and the Persian Gulf to the south. For ten points, name this
large Islamic republic with capital at Tehran. {amino acid}s Combining
one of these compounds with a reducing sugar can be used to produce
different flavors in the Maillard reaction, while reacting an aldehyde
with potassium cyanide and ammonia is involved in the Strecker
synthesis of these molecules. The dihedrals of these compounds can be
visualized using a Ramachandran plot, and people with PKU cannot
metabolize one of these compounds. Nine (*) “essential” ones,
including phenylalanine [fee - nol - AL - a - neen] and tryptophan
[TRIP - toe - fan], cannot be synthesized by the human body, and
glycine is the simplest of these molecules. For ten points, name these
organic compounds which are joined by peptide bonds to form proteins.
{parabola} (accept {quadratic} function/curve before mentioned) Each
“bulb” of the Mandelbrot set is an inverse of one of these figures,
because the bulbs are cardioids. Menaechmus found a solution to the
problem of doubling the cube by intersecting two of these figures, and
Joachim Jungus demonstrated that a catenary was not one of these
curves. This shape is the locus of all points equidistant from a focus
and a line called a  (*) directrix. This figure is equivalent to an
ellipse with one focus at infinity, and it has an eccentricity of one.
For ten points, identify this conic section, whose vertical variety is
the graph of a quadratic equation, one example of which has equation y
equals x-squared. {Finding Nemo} (do not accept just Nemo) Characters
in this film include Deb, who constantly searches for her sister, and
Jacques, who is obsessed with cleaning.  In response to a dentist’s
niece singing “Twinkle Twinkle Little Star”, Peach cries out “Find a
happy place! Find a happy place!”  The main character ascends Mount
Wanahakalugi and passes through the Ring of Fire before being given
the name (*) “Sharkbait.”  Meanwhile, two other characters try to find
P. Sherman at 42 Wallaby Way, Sydney and encounter a helpful school of
moonfish and some vegetarian sharks on the way.  For ten points, name
this Pixar film about Marlin and Dory trying to locate the title
clownfish. {J}ohann {S}ebastian {Bach} (prompt on {Bach}) In one of
this man’s works, the aria Heute noch, lieber Vater is sung by
Lieschen, who is addicted to the title drink. In addition to the
Coffee Cantata, this man also created a collection of “puzzle canons”
based on the “King’s theme” called The Musical Offering. The second
movement of this composer’s Orchestral Suite No. 3 was adapted by
August Wilhelmj into the “Air on the G String,” while one of his works
for (*) harpsichord that includes an aria and 30 variations is named
after its first performer. This man also wrote three sonatas and three
partitas for solo violin, as well as six suites for solo cello, and
six Brandenburg concertos. For ten points, name this German composer
of the Goldberg Variations and Toccata and Fugue in D Minor. {K}
(accept {k}appa or {C} before “live longer” but do not prompt after)
The Greek equivalent of this letter denotes the curvature of space
curves in math,  while this letter in biology is given to organisms
that live longer and have  fewer offspring than their “r-strategist”
counterparts. This letter in electromagnetism represents a constant
equal to one over quantity four pi times the (*)  permittivity of free
space, which is multiplied by charge over distance squared to find
electric force in Coulomb’s law. The vitamin of this letter is
important in blood clotting, while in chemistry, the equilibrium
constant is symbolized by this letter. An element often used in
fertilizers is represented by, for ten points, which letter of the
English alphabet, the chemical symbol for potassium? {Titanomachy}
(accept {war} between Olympians/gods and {Titans} or equivalents) This
event was recorded in a now-lost epic poem by Eumelus of Corinth. One
side in this conflict had their base at Mount Othrys, and the main
leader of that side would later move on to rule the Isles of the
Blessed. The beginning of it ended the peaceful Golden Age of man, and
the leader of another side in this conflict was raised by the goat
Amalthea and had his siblings (*) regurgitated due to a potion brewed
by the goddess Metis. The Hekatonkheires assisted one side by throwing
rocks at the opponents, and the Cyclopes provided lightning bolts for
Zeus to use as weapons during this event. It ended with the
imprisonment of Kronos and many of his brothers. For ten points, name
this conflict between the Olympians and the children of Gaia and
Uranus. Republic of {Peru} Tupac Amaru II rebelled against Spanish
rule in this country, and this country’s independence was sealed after
a battle in which Royalist forces under Viceroy La Cerna were defeated
by Antonio Jose de Sucre. This country was the site of the Battles of
Callao and Ayacucho, and it is currently the home of a Maoist
terrorist group formerly led by Abimael Guzman called (*) Shining
Path. This country was led in the 1990’s by Japanese-descent president
Alberto Fujimori, and it fought with Bolivia against Chile in the War
of the Pacific. For ten points, identify this South American country
home to Machu Picchu, with capital at Lima. The Ingenious Gentleman
{Don Quixote} of La Mancha (or El ingenioso hidalgo {don Quijote} de
la Mancha) One character of this work, Peter, describes how Chrysostom
fell in love with Marcela.  The protagonist of this work attempts to
end Master Pedro’s puppet show by tossing rocks and also discovers
that the helmet of Mambrino was in the hands of a barber before trying
to retrieve it. That character encounters Samson Carrasco dressed as
the (*) Knight of the White Moon, and also falls in love with
Dulcinea. The title character of this work travels with the horse
Rocinante, mistakes windmills for ferocious giants, and is accompanied
by his “squire” Sancho Panza. For ten points, name this novel written
by Miguel de Cervantes. Federal Republic of {Nigeria} This country
contains the Mambilla Plateau as well as the the western end of the
Adamawa Plateau, through which the Benue River flows. Kano is this
country’s second largest city, and the Bight of Bonny lies to this
country’s southwest. This country was home to a breakaway country
formed by native Igbo people, the Republic of  (*) Biafra. The Gulf of
Guinea lies to the southwest of the country, which contains the Niger
River delta. Lake Chad lies to the northeast of this country, which
borders Benin to the west and Cameroon to the east and whose largest
city is Lagos. For ten points, identify this most populous African
country whose capital is Abuja. Joseph Rudyard {Kipling} This author
wrote a novel in which the title character delivers some Russian maps
to Mookherjee before going to find the River of the Arrow with the
Dalai Lama. In one of this man’s poems, the speaker notes that “Of all
them blackfaced crew / The finest man I knew / Was our regimental
bhisti,” the title character. In addition to writing (*) Kim and
claiming “You’re a better man than I” in “Gunga Din” this man is most
famous for a collection which includes stories like “Toomai  of the
Elephants” and “Rikki-Tikki-Tavi.” For ten points, identify this
British author who wrote about Mowgli in The Jungle Book. Joseph
{McCarthy} This man discussed the discharge of Irving Peress when he
met with Robert Stevens in the “Chicken Luncheon.” The Hennings Report
and the Tydings Committee investigated this man. Margaret Chase Smith
gave the “Declaration of Conscience” Speech against this man. Roy Cohn
was this man’s chief counsel during his hearings with the army, in
which Joseph Welch asked this man if he had any (*) “sense of
decency.” He had earlier given a speech to a woman’s club in Wheeling,
West Virginia in which he claimed to have a list of 57 communists in
the State Department. For ten points, identify this Wisconsin senator
who led the Communist “witch-hunts” in the 1950’s. The {School of
Athens} (or {Scuola di Atene}) The layout of this painting mirrors the
plan for St. Peter’s Basilica. In the center of this painting, a man
wearing a purple shirt slumps against a box, scribbling on a sheet of
paper at the bottom of some stairs. To the right of him, a man dressed
in blue reclines on the stairs while reading a sheet of paper in his
hand. On the left side of this painting, a small crowd gathers around
(*) Pythagoras as he writes in a large book while kneeling. To the
right, a small crowd watches as Euclid bends down and draws on a small
tablet on the floor. For ten points, name this painting by Raphael
depicting Plato and Aristotle walking together through the title
building. {Loki} According to the Poetic Edda, this figure will stand
“at the helm” of the nail-ship Naglfar when Ragnarok begins. After one
son of this god is hooked, the giant Hymir cuts the line of a fishing
pole, and that son appears in a contest that sees this god lose an
eating competition to fire in the hall of a giant thought to be
Skrymir. His (*) lips were sewn shut after he interrupted the dwarf
Brokkr, resulting in Mjollnir’s shortened handle. This god was bound
with the entrails of his son and his wife Sigyn catches most of the
venom that drips above him, as punishment for tricking Hodr into
killing Baldr with mistletoe. He and Heimdall are fated to kill each
other at Ragnarok. For ten points, name this Norse trickster god, the
father of Jormangandr. Giuseppe {Garibaldi} This figure fought for the
Rio Grande do Sul during the War of the Ragamuffins, and later led the
Army of the Vosges and the Hunters of the Alps. This figure fought
with Fructuoso Rivera and the Colorados against the Blancos in the
Uruguayan Civil War. This (*) “Hero of Two Worlds” won the Battles of
Milazzo and Volturno in his most famous campaign, during which he
annexed the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies. Along with Count Cavour, this
figure led the Expedition of a Thousand, which restored Victor
Emmanuel II to power. For ten points, identify this figure from the
Risorgimento who led the Redshirts and unified Italy. electric
{charge} For two identical particles, this quantity-squared equals
four pi times the permittivity of free space times the distance
between the particles squared times force. The energy stored in a
capacitor is equal to this quantity-squared divided by two times
voltage, and the (*) electric dipole moment is equal to this quantity
times distance between the particles. This quantity was shown to be
quantized by the Millikan oil drop experiment, and it is equal to
current times time. The letter Q often symbolizes, for ten points,
what quantity measured in Coulombs, which is positive for protons and
negative for electrons? Kingdom of {Sweden} This country’s cities of
Eskilstuna and Vasteras lie in the valley of Lake Mälaren. Its highest
peak, Kebnekaise, lies within the Fjällen mountain range. Its longest
river, the Klaralven-Gota alv, drains this country’s largest body of
water, Lake Vanern. Visby lies on this country’s largest island,
Gotland, and other cities in this country include Umea, Helsinborg,
Gothenburg, and (*) Uppsala. The  Øresund Bridge connects this
country’s city of Malmo to the island of Zeeland. This country is
bordered to the east by the Gulf of Bothnia, to the south by the
Kattegat and the Baltic Sea, and to the west by Norway. For ten
points, identify this Scandinavian country with capital at Stockholm.
{differentiation} (or taking the {derivative}, accept partial
{differentiation}/{derivative}) One type of this operation is done to
a scalar function to produce the gradient, and the entries of a
Jacobian matrix are results of one type of this operation. This
operation applied to f(x) (“f of x”) at a is the limit as h goes to
zero of f(a+h)-f(a) (“f of a plus h minus f of a”) all divided by h.
Applying this operation to sine of x twice gives negative (*) sine of
x, and applying it to x to the nth power gives n times x to the n
minus oneth power. Developed simultaneously by Newton and Leibniz, for
ten points, what is this slope-estimating operation from calculus, the
opposite of integration? {Heart of Darkness} One character in this
work sees a painting of a blindfolded woman holding a torch, which a
brick-maker says was painted by this novel’s antagonist. The
protagonist finds a note left in a pile of firewood, which a wandering
Russian claims he left there. That Russian as well as native tribes in
the area come to worship one character, whom they believe to be a god.
Later in the work, the protagonist picks up and reads a pamphlet from
the antagonist, which states, (*) “Exterminate all the brutes!” “The
Horror! The Horror!” are the last words of the Congo ivory collector
Kurtz in, for ten points, what novel about Charles Marlow by Joseph
Conrad? {liver} Councilman bodies are cells of this organ which
undergo apoptosis, and this organ is surrounded by Glisson’s capsule.
The falciform ligament runs down the middle of this organ, and
erythrocytes can be broken down by its Kupffer cells. This organ
contains high levels of copper in Wilson’s Disease, and it also adds
glucuronic acid to (*) bilirubin. The site of gluconeogenesis and
cholesterol synthesis, this organ also produces an enzyme which
emulsifies fats and is stored in the gallbladder. Diseases in this
organ, such as hepatitis, often cause jaundice, and scarring of this
organ, or cirrhosis, can be caused by alcoholism.  Bile is produced
by, for ten points, what largest internal organ, which also plays a
vital role in detoxification? {Zoroastrianism} (accept {Zarathustrism}
before read “Zarathustra”; accept {Mazdaism} before read “Mazda”;
accept {Parsiism}) King Vishtaspa was the first guardian of this
religion, and taught his followers about those who are truthful and
those who are liars, or the asha and druj. One branch of this religion
believes the first man to be created was Gayomart, while another
branch worships the deity Zurvan. This religion believes the dead
cross the Chinvat Bridge, and evil (*) daevas are described in this
religion’s Vendidad. Practitioners of this religion suspend dead
bodies in “Towers of Silence.” Its Yasnas, which contain the Gathas,
describe the Amesha Spentas, and this religion’s main text, the
Avesta, describes the continuous fighting between Angra Mainyu and
Ahura Mazda. For ten points, name this ancient Iranian religion
founded by the prophet Zarathustra. The {Girl With the Dragon Tattoo
}(or {Man som hatar kvinnor} or {Men Who Hate Women}) One character in
this novel uses the pen name Carl to write a report about the Bear
Gang, while another character was assigned by Frode to investigate
Kalle, who was himself commissioned to write the memoirs of Frode’s
leader Harald and is shown a wall covered in flower pictures. He then
hires the other main character to use her (*) hacking skills to look
up evidence of a parade online to find out whom Harriet was glaring at
before she disappeared. For ten points, name this novel in which
Mikael Blomkvist is helped by Lisbeth Salander to catch a killer of
women, the first work in a posthumously published Stieg Larson
trilogy. Sir Winston Leonard Spencer {Churchill} This man returned his
country to the gold standard while Chancellor of the Exchequer under
Stanley Baldwin. Herbert Asquith appointed this man First Lord of the
Admiralty, though he later resigned from that position after the
disastrous Gallipoli campaign. This man promised to “fight them on the
beaches” and proclaimed that (*) “this was their finest hour” during
the Battle of Britain. During a speech in Fulton, Missouri, this man
claimed that an “iron curtain” had descended over Europe. He was
preceded in his highest position by Neville Chamberlain and succeeded
by Clement Attlee. For ten points, identify this Prime Minister who
led the UK through World War II. Antonín Leopold {Dvořák} (DVOR-jahk)
This man composed a ten-part cantata following the death of his
daughter Josefa, while his eighth symphony, originally published as
his fourth, begins with a G major arpeggio in the cellos and features
a “bird call” flute melody. This composer of Stabat Mater was inspired
by a trip to Spillville, Iowa to write the “American” string quartet,
while a work by Brahms led to the composition of his 16 (*) Slavonic
Dances. This man wrote a famous English horn solo in the second
movement of his ninth symphony, a work inspired by The Song of
Hiawatha which also quotes “Swing Low, Sweet Chariot.” For ten points,
name this Czech composer of the New World Symphony. {William the
Conqueror} (accept {William I} of England; or {William the Bastard};
prompt on “William”) This figure defeated Edgar Ætheling in his
Harrying of the North, and he suppressed the Revolt of the Earls with
his half-brother Odo. This son of Robert the Magnificent, husband of
Matilda of Flanders, and father of Henry I was supported by Pope
Alexander II. This ruler also constructed the White Tower in London
and commissioned census known as the Domesday Book, although he may be
more famous for fighting a battle at (*) Senlac Hill in which his
opponent was fatigued from a battle at Stamford Bridge. The Bayeaux
Tapestry depicts this figure’s battle with Harold Godwinson. For ten
points, name this Norman victor of the 1066 Battle of Hastings.
Nathanael {Hawthorne} This author wrote a work in which Mr. Medbourne,
Mr. Gascoigne, and Colonel Killigrew all desire to turn younger in
order to woo Widow Wycherly. He also wrote a work in which Aylmer
desires to remove Georgiana’s hand-shaped stain, and another work in
which Elizabeth asks Reverend Hopper to take off the title item of
clothing. This author of “The (*) Birthmark” and “The Minister’s Black
Veil” also wrote a work in which Roger Chillingworth finds out about
Arthur Dimmesdale’s affair with Hester Prynne, who is forced to wear a
red A. For ten points, name this American author of The Scarlet
Letter. John Maynard {Keynes}, Baron Keynes of Tilton This man
commented that “in the long run, we’re all dead” in his A Tract on
Monetary Reform, and he differentiated savings and investment in his A
Treatise on Money. He opposed reparations after World War I and called
the Treaty of Versailles a “Carthaginian Peace.” This author of The
(*) Economic Consequences of the Peace is more famous for writing a
work in which he defines the “marginal efficiency of capital”. For ten
points, name this British economist and author of The General Theory
of Employment, Interest, and Money, who encouraged deficit spending
during the Great Depression. Norman {Mailer} In one of this author’s
works, the main character flees to Russia after discovering that his
friend, Hugh Montague, died after finding his wife, Kettridge,
associating with another man. In addition to writing about Harry
Hubbard in Harlot’s Ghost, this author who wrote about the March on
Pentagon in The Armies of the Night also wrote a work in which Gary
Gilmore does not want his death sentence repealed. This author wrote
about the invasion of the (*) Japanese island Anopopei in another
novel, which sees an argument between Lieutenant Hearn and General
Cummings. For ten points, name this author of The Executioner’s Song
and The Naked and the Dead. {Han} Dynasty (or {Han} Chao) This empire
first became an independent state after fighting against the Chu-state
leader Xiang Yu in the Battle of Gaixia, and the Vietnamese Trung
sisters revolted against its rule. Another revolt in this dynasty was
led by the Red Eyebrows, and Sima Qian completed The Records of the
Grand Historian under this dynasty. It was divided into (*) “Western”
and “Eastern” portions after an interruption from the Xin Dynasty led
by Wang Mang, and Liu Bang founded this empire after the conclusion of
the Qin Dynasty. For ten points, name this 208 B.C.E. to 220 C.E.
Chinese Dynasty which also names the dominant ethnic group of China.
{Antarctica} Nazi Germany claimed a portion of this region and called
it New Swabia. This region also contains Enderby Land and the
Ellsworth Mountains. Its Lake Vanda serves as the mouth of the Onyx
River, and its Palmer Land borders the Belingshausen Sea. This
region’s Ross Island is home to McMurdo (*) Station and Mount Erebus.
This region’s highest point, Vinson Massif, lies on the Ronne Ice
Shelf, which borders the Weddell Sea. Lake Vostok lies in this region,
parts of which are claimed by seven different countries and which
borders all the oceans except the Arctic. For ten points, name this
southernmost continent where one can find penguins and the South Pole.
{photoelectric} effect (or {Hertz} effect before mentioned) A magnetic
analogue of this phenomenon has been recently discovered by Oliveira
and Rand. Philipp Lenard discovered that it can cause a sheet of zinc
to gain a positive charge, and the minimum value of a certain quantity
in order for this phenomenon to occur can be found by dividing the
work function by Planck’s constant. This phenomenon was first
discovered when (*) ultraviolet light was shined on a spark gap by
Heinrich Hertz, and Einstein won a Nobel Prize by explaining that it
is due to the particle nature of light. For ten points, identify this
effect in which objects emit electrons as they absorb high-energy
photons. {Yasunari} {Kawabata} (accept either) One of this author’s
works describes a narrator who feels the Milky Way flow “down inside
him with a roar”. In yet another work of this author, one character’s
mistresses include Chikako Kurimoto and Mrs. Ota, who commits suicide
after having an affair with Kikuji Mitani. This author also wrote a
novel in which Otake makes a controversial sealed play to (*) win the
title game, while his most famous novel describes Yuko, who is saved
by Komako while Shimamura watches. For ten points, identify this
Japanese author of Thousand Cranes, The Master of Go, and Snow
Country. {Oedipus} This man is said to have cursed his sons when they
served him with a silver table and golden goblet belonging to his
great-great grandfather. This figure was rescued from Mount Cithaeron
by Polybus of Corinth, and in his old age, this man came under the
protection of Theseus and the Erinyes. This man’s son Polyneices was
killed by his brother in a duel for the throne, and he himself killed
a king at the Phocis (*) crossroads. As a reward for causing the
sphinx to commit suicide after he correctly answered her riddle, this
man replaced King Laius as the husband of Jocasta. For ten points,
name this Theban king, who, as Tiresias predicted,  married his mother
and killed his father. {Brave New World} In this work, one character
becomes angry after seeing Three Weeks in a Helicopter, a film which
reminds him of his mother’s various affairs with Pope.  That mother,
Linda, was abandoned in a site in New Mexico after having a child with
the Director of Hatcheries, and later dies after being returned. In
this novel, one character sends (*) Helmholtz Watson to the Falkland
Islands where he can freely express himself after being “corrupted” by
the sciences and arts. Another character, Bernard Marx, is also exiled
by Mustapha Mond after associating with a character that begs for the
right to be unhappy, John the Savage. Set in the year of Our Ford 632,
for ten points, name this dystopian novel written by Aldous Huxley.
{trumpet} Aram Khachaturian’s third symphony includes 15 solo ones of
these instruments, and the first movement of Gustav Mahler’s first
symphony calls for these instruments playing offstage. This instrument
poses the title inquiry of Charles Ives’s The Unanswered Question,
while Joseph Haydn’s only work for the chromatic type of this
instrument was a concerto dedicated to Anton (*) Weidinger. The
“piccolo” type of this instrument is pitched an octave higher than the
standard B-flat type of this three-valved instrument, which is a close
relative of the cornet. For ten points, name this brass instrument
with the highest register, notably played by Miles Davis and Louis
Armstrong. Thomas {Hobbes} This man described imagination as “nothing
but decaying sense” while passions are “interior beginnings of
voluntary notions” in a work that claimed covenants formed with God
are meaningless. This man’s best known work expands on concepts first
proposed in his On the Citizen, and uses his ideas of imagination, or
the “decaying sense,” to analyze human motivation. This thinker
described the (*) “Kingdom of Darkness” as a “Confederacy of
Deceivers” and described chaos as the war of all against all. He also
claimed that life in the state of nature is“solitary, poor, nasty,
brutish, and short.” For ten points, name this English social contract
theorist and author of Leviathan. Battle of {Saratoga} Barry St. Leger
was unable to reach this battle after a failed siege of Fort Stanwix.
One side in this battle was fresh off a victory at Fort Ticonderoga,
but had last most of its Iroquois support in the Battle of Bennington.
Timothy Murthy killed Simon Fraser in this battle, which was part of
an attempt to divide New England in two. Parts of this battle were
fought at (*) Freeman’s Farm and Bemis Heights. The eventual loser at
this battle was unable to receive reinforcements from Henry Clinton
and William Howe and was defeated after the arrival of Benedict
Arnold. For ten points, identify this 1777 battle in which British
forces under John Burgoyne were defeated by Americans under Horatio
Gates in upstate New York, which turned the tide in the American
Revolution. Albert {Camus} One of this author’s works sees d’Arrast
carry a burden all the way to Iguape Church. That story, “The Growing
Stone,” is part of his collection, Exile and the Kingdom, and this man
wrote a novella in which the attorney Clamence regrets letting a girl
drown. This author of The (*) Fall wrote a novel in which Dr. Bernard
Rieux narrates an epidemic sweeping through Oran. This author of The
Myth of Sisyphus and The Plague is best known for writing a work in
which the main character is sentenced to death after senselessly
killing an Arab. For ten points, name this French existentialist who
wrote about Mersault in The Stranger. Aubrey {Drake} Graham This
singer hosted the first annual October’s Very Own festival in which he
brought out the VIP list of rap stars including Jay-Z and Eminem. In
2006 he released his first mix tape, “Room For Improvement,” followed
a year later by another mix tape, “Comeback Season.” His first acting
role was the physically disabled basketball star Jimmy Brooks in (*)
Degrassi, and in 2009 this man performed with an injured knee and fell
on stage when singing his hit song “Best I Ever Had.” In another song,
he states that he “floated way too long,/[he’s] floating in and out of
consciousness.” For 10 points, name this Canadian rapper whose recent
hit singles include “Every Girl” and “Headlines.” {six} Some Muslims
fast for this many days during the month of Shawwal, and there are
this number of orders in the Misnah. There are this many items in a
collection including maror and charoset, the foods on a traditional
(*) Passover seder plate. On this day in the Genesis creation myth,
God ordered some beings to “be fruitful and multiply,” and created all
the beasts of the land and created in his image the first humans. This
digit is repeated three times in the number of the Beast. For ten
points, how many points are there in a Jewish Star of David?
{ribonucleic acid} or {RNA} (accept {RNA} interference; prompt on
{nucleic acid} but do not accept or prompt on “deoxyribonucleic acid”
or “DNA” at any time) One process named after these molecules can be
initiated by morpholinos and sees Dicer cleave the ds type of these to
form a RISC. Puromycin imitates one type of these molecules, which
sometimes contain pseudouridine or inosine. They can form snRNPs
[“snurps”] with proteins, and ones that catalyze reactions are called
ribozymes. (*) Wobble base pairs can be found on one type of these
molecules, which is typically depicted as a clover leaf and contains
an anticodon. Another type of these molecules can be translated by
ribosomes into proteins. For ten points, name this nucleic acid with
messenger and transfer types which contains uracil and is typically
single-stranded, unlike DNA. Henry Wadsworth {Longfellow} This poet
wrote how the “scenes/ and seasons” were “changeless since the day”
his wife died in one of his poems, while another of this man’s works
details the title character with “His hair...crisp, and black, and
long” and how he is “toiling,--rejoicing,--sorrowing” as life
continues. In addition to “The Cross of Snow” and “The (*) Village
Blacksmith”, this author also wrote a work in which John Alden gets
married with Prisca Mullins despite the title Puritan’s broken heart.
This author of The Courtship of Miles Standish also wrote about
Minehaha’s love for the title character on the shores of Gitche Gumee.
For ten points, name this author of “Paul Revere’s Ride” and “The Song
of Hiawatha”. {Third Crusade} (or {Kings’ Crusade}; prompt on
“Crusade”) One man’s fleet was captured by Isaac Komnenos while en
route to this event, and a conflict within this event involved Conrad
of Monferrat’s claim to the throne. After sacking the Sultanate of
Rum, one leader of this event was replaced by Leopold V. This event
was preceded by Baldwin IV’s victory at the Battle of Montgisard and
the defeat of Raynald of Chatillon and Guy of Lusignan at the Battle
of Hattin. Philip II helped capture (*) Acre in this event, and
another leader won the Battle of Arsuf with help from the Knights
Templar. For ten points, identify this 1189-1192 AD attempt to
recapture the Holy Land which saw the drowning of Frederick Barbarossa
and many battles between Saladin and Richard the Lionheart. Edward
{Hopper} This man painted a woman dressed in black sitting in one of
the nine viewable green sofas in his work, Chair Car. Another of his
works depicts a blue-clad secretary opening a black filing cabinet and
a blond man reading some papers in his Office at Night. This artist of
(*) Early Sunday Morning created a work in which a woman wearing green
converses with another person at a white table. In addition to Chop
Suey, this man’s most famous work has an advertisement selling
Phillies cigars for five cents. For ten points, name this American
artist who painted people at a diner in Nighthawks. {democracy} One
work about this concept claims that it can lead to a preoccupation
with material goods and stifle literary development, and was written
while its author and Gustave de Beaumont were studying the
penitentiary system in the United States. The concept of creative
destruction was proposed by Joseph Schumpeter in a work titled
Capitalism, Socialism, and this, and another work with this in its
title attempts to use the philosophies of Plato and Rousseau to
improve American (*) schooling. Aristotle described this concept as a
perversion of a polity. Alexis de Tocqueville warned of a tyranny of
the majority in a work titled this in America, while John Dewey wrote
about this and Education. For ten points, name this concept often
described as a government by the people. {yellow} (accept {orange} or
{amber} or similar until “cake”) This color indicates the reactivity
of a chemical on the NFPA 704 label, and at 1% efficiency, DPSS lasers
of this color are the most expensive per unit of power. The Briggs-
Rauscher reaction abruptly changes to blue from this color, which is
emitted by stars of spectral classes F and G. Proteins with aromatic
rings turn this color when reacted with nitric acid. The Fraunhofer
line in the solar spectrum is of this color, which denotes the number
four on resistors. (*) Helium was first observed as a spectral line of
this color, and xanophylls and some cartenoids are pigments of this
color. Sodium is used in fireworks to create this color, and uranium
oxide is also known as this color of cake. Sulfur is commonly of, for
ten points, what color, which is a primary color along with red and
blue? {All Quiet on the Western Front} (or {Im Westen nichts Neues})
The protagonist of this novel swims with Lee and Kropp across a
waterway to meet three French women, and earlier in this work, the
protagonist becomes friends with a bedwetter named Tjaden. The
protagonist of this work obtains the boots of Kemmerich after the
death of Muller, and he later stabs (*) Gerard Duval to death.  He is
encouraged to join the army by his schoolmaster Kantorek, and the
protagonist of this novel is led by the mean Corporal Himmelstoss. For
ten points, name this novel that details the experiences of Paul
Baumer in World War I, a work by Erich Maria Remarque. {Monroe
Doctrine} James G. Blaine’s “Big Brother” approach extended this
policy to open markets for US trade, while the Clark Memorandum
concluded that it did not apply to the US during an act of self-
defense. It was supported by Britain as part of the Pax Britannica,
but criticism of this policy described it as a (*) sphere of influence
“to leave America for the Americans.” The “Good Neighbor” policy
overturned a previous corollary to this policy established by Theodore
Roosevelt. For ten points, identify this policy, written by John
Quincy Adams, which opposed European intervention in the Western
Hemisphere and was named after the 5th president of the US. {one} The
Mobius function takes this value for square-free inputs with an even
number of prime factors. An n-simplex has n plus this number of
vertices, and a tree on n vertices has an edge count of n minus this
number. Benford’s Law states that this number is most likely to be the
first digit of a given integer. This number is the leading coefficient
of all (*) monic polynomials and the degree of all non-horizontal
linear functions. Dividing this number by x gives the reciprocal of x.
This number represents the probability of an event that will always
occur, and this number is the zeroth power of every positive integer.
For ten points, give this largest number equal to its own square, the
smallest positive integer. John {Calvin} (or Jean {Calvin}) One
student of this man published Passavantius as an attack against Pierre
Lizet. This teacher of Theodore Beza was opposed by Arminius’s
Remonstrants. In his most famous work, this figure claimed, “as it is
in the creation of man that the divine perfections are best
displayed,” and this figure’s followers burned Michael Servetus alive.
Formulator of the theories of Irresistible Grace and Total Depravity
in his (*) “Five Points”, this man’s views were carried to Scotland by
John Knox. For ten points, name this author of Institutes of the
Christian Religion who led the Reformation in Geneva and created a
denomination that believes in predestination. {resist}ance (or
{impedance} before mentioned) The time constant is equal to inductance
divided by this value, and one formula for this quantity gives it as
rho (“row”) times length divided by cross-sectional area. The complex
inverse of this quantity is called admittance, and (*) impedance is
the complex value of this quantity for AC circuits. Thevenin’s Theorem
states that all circuits are equivalent to ones with only a source of
voltage and a source of this, and it is equal to voltage divided by
current. For ten points, name this quantity measured in ohms, the
ability of a circuit element to oppose the passage of electrical
current. Margaret {Mead} This thinker’s tape-recorded conversation
with James Baldwin was transcribed for the book A Rap on Race. This
author discovered that the Arapash people of the Sepik are generally
nonviolent, and concluded that females of Tchambuli are dominant in
another work. The most famous work by this author of  (*) Sex and
Temperament in Three Primitive Societies includes the sections
“Education for Choice” and “Formal Sex Relations”. That work was
criticized by Derek Freeman five years after the death of this
thinker, who garnered her observations from 68 women on the Polynesian
island of Tau. For ten points, name this American anthropologist who
wrote Coming of Age in Samoa. Margaret {Atwood} This author wrote a
work in which Ainsley attempts to seduce Len so that she may bear a
child and Marian tests Duncan by offering him a cake in the shape of a
woman. In another work by this author of The Edible Woman, a novel
attributed to Laura is revealed to have been based on Alex Thomas’
affair with Iris Chase. In addition to The (*) Blind Assassin, this
author wrote a novel in which Snowman leads the Crakers as one of the
last humans on Earth. In her most famous work, The Commander owns a
woman in the Republic of Gilead named Offred. For ten points, identify
this Canadian author of Oryx and Crake and The Handmaid’s Tale.
Johannes “Jan” {Vermeer} This man painted a woman in blue with a book
in her left hand, who represents Clio, in one work, and in another, a
large cello can be seen behind a brown-haired girl playing the
virginal. This artist of The Music Lesson and The Art of Painting
illustrated a woman dressed in blue and yellow pouring milk from a
brown container in The (*) Milkmaid. This artist may be more famous
for painting a group of people who wait for a boat to reach the title
city, and for a painting showing a figure with a white collar, glossy
lips, and the title piece of jewelry. For ten points, name this Dutch
painter of View of Delft, who also painted a girl with a blue and
yellow turban in his Girl With a Pearl Earring. “{Dover Beach”} The
speaker of this poem remarks that the world “seems to lie before us
like a land of dreams” and comments “sweet is the night air” after
commanding the reader to “come to the window.” This poem states that
some occurrences seem to “Begin, and cease, and then again begin”
while the speaker notes the “grating roar of pebbles.” In its fourth
stanza, the speaker can only hear the “Sea of Faith’s” (*)
“melancholy, long, withdrawing roar.”  This poem mentions how,
“Sophocles, long ago/ Heard it on the Aegean” and begins, “The sea is
calm to-night”. For ten points, name this work that comments on a
world where “ignorant armies clash by night” on a “darkling plain”, a
poem by Matthew Arnold. {Quetzalcoatl} This god’s twin brother had the
head of a dog, and this god immolated himself for sleeping with his
sister while drunk, after which he became a brother of the planet
Venus. He sprinkled his own blood onto some bones in the underworld of
Mictlan, and in doing so created the fifth race of man. This son of
Coatlicue [COAT - lee - cue] had a rivalry with a brother who had his
foot bitten off by a crocodile. That brother had a name meaning  (*)
“smoking mirror,” and their rivalry caused this god to be exiled on a
raft of snakes. For ten points, name this white-skinned “feathered
serpent” and rival of Tezcatlipoca whom the Aztecs confused with a
Spanish conquistador. Chris {Christie} This man asked reporters if
“the only way [he could] convince [them] that [he] was not running
for” a certain office was “to commit suicide.” Third party candidate
Chris Daggett drew off votes from this man’s opponent in a race where
his running mate was Kim Guadagno, helping him beat Jon Corzine. He
served as the chief federal law enforcement officer in (*) New Jersey
from 2002 to 2008, and he constantly has to tell the media that it is
not a “newsflash” that he is overweight.. For ten points, name this
man who ultimately decided not to run for the Republican nomination in
the 2012 Presidential election, the current governor of New Jersey.
the Great {Peloponnesian} War One side in this war received important
financial help prior to the Battle of Notium. The first phase of this
war, the Archidamian War, was ended through the peace treaty named
after an Athenian general. The eventual losers of this conflict
launched the failed Sicilian Expedition, and during this war, Cleon
died at the Battle of  (*) Amphipolis after replacing a commander who
had earlier died from a plague. Paused temporarily by the Peace of
Nicias, this war saw the defeat of the Delian League and was
chronicled by Thucydides. For ten points, name this fifth-century war
which saw the defeat of Athens by Sparta. {Arthropoda} Eurypterids
were early aquatic members of this phylum that lived in the Ordovician
and Silurian periods. Some members of this phylum have book lungs, and
are usually grouped into the subphylum Chelicerata. The largest
members of this phylum were the Meganisoptera, and families in this
phylum include (*) Hymenoptera and Lepidoptera. Like molluscs, members
of this phylum use hemolymph instead of a closed circulatory system,
and s silverfish are part of this phylum. Members of this phylum have
chitin exoskeletons, and were also the first to develop complex eyes
and flight. Trilobites were ancient members of, for ten points, what
phylum of animals that includes insects and arachnids? {sleep} (accept
word forms; do not accept or prompt on “dream” or word forms) John
Lennon sings the lyrics “So sgt. pepper took you by surprise / You
better see right through that mother’s eyes” in a song that asks “How
do you” do this. An Argentinian in Moulin Rouge is prone to this
condition, and in another movie, Yusuf drives a white van off a bridge
to provide a (*) “kick” that causes his passengers to stop doing this.
The narrator of Fight Club has difficulty doing this. The moves Dark
Void and Spore induce this condition in Pokémon, and Jigglypuff draws
on people when it does this. Most of Inception occurs when its
characters are in a state of, for ten points, what action, which a
beauty was doing before Prince Charming awakened her with a kiss?
Jalaluddin Muhammad {Akbar} the Great This figure organized his army
with the mansabdari system and founded a new capital at Fatehpur. A
biography written by Abul Fazl was one of the Nine Jewels of this
figure’s court. This leader’s dahsala system was based on a system
used by Sher Shah Suri, and he pursued diplomacy with Hindus by
marrying a Rajput princess. He gathered various religions and combined
them into his (*) Din-i-Ilahi, or “Divine Faith.” He repealed the
jizya tax on non- Muslims and his general Bairam Khan defeated Hemu at
the Second Battle of Panipat. For ten points, identify this grandson
of Babur who ruled over the Mughal Empire at its height. {E minor}
(prompt on partial answer; accept just {E} after “minor”) Mozart’s
only work in this key is his Violin Sonata No. 21, and it is also the
key of a lute suite composed by J. S. Bach. This key describes Johann
Brahms’s fourth symphony, as well as Giuseppi Verdi’s only string
quartet. Tchaikovsky’s fifth symphony is in this key, as is the New
World Symphony. The submediant of this key is C, while F sharp is its
supertonic. One concerto in this key was inspired by a melody that
gave its composer no peace. Jacqueline du Pré popularized Edward
Elgar’s (*) cello concerto in this key, which is also the key of Felix
Mendelssohn’s Violin Concerto. G major is the relative major of this
key, which has only one sharp. For ten points, name this minor key
whose tonic is a whole step above D. {San Francisco} This city
contains hills such as Pacific Heights and Russian Hill, and its
“Painted Ladies” are located near Alamo Square. Coit Tower stands atop
Telegraph Hill in this city’s Pioneer Park, and neighborhoods in this
city include the Castro, the Richmond, and the Sunset. Ghirardelli
Square and Pier 39 are found at (*) Fisherman’s Wharf in this city,
and famous landmarks within it include the Transamerica Pyramid and
Candlestick Park. Its Lombard Street contains hairpin turns, and one
can ascend Nob Hill using this city’s iconic cable car system. Its
namesake bay contains Angel and Alcatraz Islands, and it shares a
metropolitan area with Oakland and San Jose. For ten points, name this
city in California that is the site of the Golden Gate Bridge. Sylvia
{Plath} This author wrote that “Perfection is terrible, it cannot have
children” in one poem, while another describes skin “bright as a Nazi
lampshade.” In addition to writing “The Munich Mannequins” this author
also wrote a poem in which the title character tells her father, “I’m
through”. This author of  (*) “Lady Lazarus” and “Daddy” wrote a novel
in which the main character undergoes shock therapy under the
suggestions of Dr. Nolan after multiple attempts at suicide because
she feels trapped under the title object. For ten points, name this
author who wrote about Esther Greenwood in The Bell Jar. Antoine-
Laurent de {Lavoisier} This man collaborated with Laplace on
experiments that showed that respiration was essentially a slow
combustion of organic material, and he also hypothesized the existence
of allotropes upon discovering that diamond was a crystalline form of
carbon. After conducting experiments with Cavendish’s “inflammable
air”, he coined the names (*) “hydrogen” and “oxygen,” which he used
to disprove the phlogiston theory of combustion. Later in life, he was
accused by Jean-Paul Marat and guillotined during the French
Revolution. For ten points, name this scientist who first discovered
the law of conservation of mass and was nicknamed the “father of
modern chemistry.” Benito Amilcare Andrea {Mussolini} This figure
drained the Pontine Marshes and was rescued in Operation Eiche, also
known as the Gran Sasso raid. This figure supported the newspaper
“Avanti!” and signed the Lateran Treaty with Pope Pius XI. He forced
King Zog out of Albania and was later executed near Lake Como while
fleeing to Switzerland. This leader of the Salo Republic signed the
(*) Pact of Steel and promised to make the trains run on time. He let
the March on Rome with his Blackshirts in order to depose Victor
Emmanuel III, and he was given the nickname “Il Duce.” For ten points,
identify this Fascist ruler of Italy during World War II. Gaius Julius
Caesar {Augustus} (or {Octavian} or Gaius {Octavius} Thurinus) This
man exiled his daughter Julia for her licentious behavior, and refused
to allow her to be buried in the family mausoleum.  This man claimed
to be divi filius, or “son of god,” and was elected consul alongside
Marcus Agrippa.  This man established the Praetorian Guard and ordered
the death of Caesarion, and this man’s reign marks the beginning of a
(*) pax sometimes named for him.  He wrote of his accomplishments in
the Res Gestae, and he was part of the second triumvirate along with
Lepidus and Antony. For ten points, name this general and politician,
succeeded by Tiberius, the first Roman Emperor. Carlos {Fuentes}
Macías This author wrote a work in which Pollo Phoibe and Celstina
fall in love after discussing the construction of the El Escorial, and
wrote another work in which Felipe Montero dreams of eloping with
Consuelo’s 109-year-old niece. In addition to Terra Nostra and Aura,
this author wrote a more recognized work that describes (*) Harriet
Winslow, the General, and the title character in love triangle. In his
most famous work, a corrupt politician has an affair with Laura and
desires to inherit Don Gamaliel's fortune, while the title event
occurs after his traveling to Hermosillo. For ten points, name this
Mexican author who fictionalized the last days of Ambrose Bierce in
The Old Gringo and wrote The Death of Artemio Cruz. {plane} (accept
word forms like {planar}ity) It’s not a sphere, but a non-intersecting
graph cannot be drawn on one of these objects if and only if it has
subgraphs homeomorphic to either K-sub 3 comma 3 or K-sub 5, a result
known as Kuratowski’s Theorem. These entities can be defined by a
point and a normal vector, and their equations can be of the form (*)
ax+by+cz=d (“ay ex plus bee why plus see zee equals dee”). The
intersection of two of these forms a line if they are not parallel,
and three non-collinear points determine one. Two lines are skew if
they do not lie on the same one of, for ten points, what construct
from mathematics, a flat two- dimensional surface? {force} For a wire
suspended in a magnetic field, the magnitude of this quantity is equal
to the magnitude of the current times the length times the field
strength, and when a charge is in an electric field, this quantity is
the product of the charge and the field strength. This quantity is
generally equal to the derivative of momentum with respect to time.
This quantity is proportional to (*) displacement in a spring by
Hooke’s Law and, in the case of its electromagnetism, varies inversely
with distance squared. The “normal” type of this always acts
perpendicularly to an inclined plane an object rests on. For ten
points, what is this vector quantity from physics, which is equal to
mass times acceleration and is often measured in Newtons?
{Rasta}farianism (or {Rasta}fari Movement) Sects of this religious
movement include the Niyabinghi Order and the Bobo Ashanti, and the
holy city of this religion is Lalibela. Robert Rogers wrote one of
this religion’s texts, the Holy Piby, which identifies Marcus Garvey
as a prophet of this religion. Members of this religion use words like
“upfulness” and “overstanding” and reject (*) “-isms.” Believers of
this monotheistic religion worship the deity “Jah,” and ceremonies in
this religion include Reasonings and Groundations, both of which
require the use of ritual marijuana, or “ganja.” For ten points,
identify this religion which is most commonly associated with reggae
music and dreadlocked Jamaicans like Bob Marley. {fluorine} (accept
{F} before read) This element is bonded to sodium and aluminum in
cryolite, and it can be found naturally in minerals such as topaz and
apatite. It was first isolated in the lab by Henri Moissan, and a
compound containing six atoms of this element is used during the
uranium enrichment process. Neil Bartlett created the first known
noble gas compound using (*) xenon and this element. This element is
found in the polymer Teflon and is also bonded to carbon and chlorine
in Freon. It is an extremely strong oxidizing agent, since it has the
highest electronegativity out of all the elements. For ten points,
identify this lightest halogen with atomic number 9 and chemical
symbol F. {Delta}s (prompt on descriptions like “{mouth} of a river”
after “Gilbert”; accept descriptions like “{mouth} of a river” before
“Gilbert”) Inland ones of these features are demonstrated near Marajó
in Brazil and by the Okavango in Botswana. The Gilbert type of these
are formed by coarse sediments, while erosion controls the shape of
the wave-dominated type of these. These features come in arcuate,
cuspate, and bird foot varieties, and their slopes are shallower than
(*) alluvial fans. Belém lies near one of these, as do Rotterdam,
Nanjing, Ho Chi Minh City, New Orleans, and Cairo. For ten points,
name this geographic feature where rivers form a roughly triangular
shape as they meet the sea, named after the fourth letter of the Greek
alphabet. The {Last of the Mohicans} One character in this work, David
Gamut, tries to teach beavers to sing psalms. Two characters in this
work are escorted to Fort William Henry from Fort Edward, and another
scene shows Heyward admit his love for Alice and receive permission
from a Colonel to court her. Invited to a parley by the French General
Montcalm, the (*) Munro sisters are saved by Hawkeye after they are
captured by the Magua. The title characters of this work are Uncas and
his father Chingachook. For ten points, name this novel about Natty
Bumppo, the second work of the Leatherstocking Tales by James Fenimore
Cooper. Battle of {Chancellorsville} Cavalry under General Stoneman
were sent to destroy railroad supply lines at the start of this
battle, and forces under Anderson convened at Zoan Church prior to
this conflict. Despite facing an army twice his size, the winning
commander at this battle divided his troops and forced the Union army
led by (*) Joseph Hooker to retreat across the Rappahannock. Lee
claimed that he had “lost his right hand” after a Confederate general
in this battle was killed by friendly fire. For ten points, identify
this 1863 Confederate victory, known as Lee’s “perfect battle,” which
saw the death of Thomas “Stonewall” Jackson. Alexander Sergeyevich
{Pushkin} This author was inspired by Mozart’s Don Giovanni to write a
work included in his The Little Tragedies collection, and another work
sees Parasha die in a flood of the river Neva and Evgenii killed by a
statue of Peter the Great. This author of The Stone Guest and The (*)
Bronze Horseman also wrote a work in which the protagonist dances with
Olga at a ball. That character is not stopped by Zaretsky from dueling
and killing Vladmir Lensky after he flirts with and later spurns the
love of Tatiana Larina. For ten points, name this Russian author of
Eugene Onegin. {Athens} The appearance of one of this city’s kings
prompted three princesses to go insane and jump off a cliff. That king
was the son of Gaia and Hephaestus and was named Erichthonius. Another
king of this city offered amnesty to Heracles for the murder of his
wife and children and agreed to help Adrastus topple the rule of
Eteocles. The first king of this city was supposedly (*) half-man and
half-serpent and judged the patronship contest for this city. That
king, Cecrops II, determined that the olive tree was more useful than
the salt spring and therefore awarded patronship to the goddess of
wisdom. For ten points, name this city that, under the rule of
Theseus, was the first to institute democracy. {cell membrane} (or
{plasma membrane}) Molecule movement within this structure is aided by
enzymes like flippases. Integrins and sphingolipids are found within
this structure, and cholesterol is a factor in determining its
fluidity. Sodium-potassium pumps are embedded in this structure, which
can be considered to act as a two- dimensional liquid with solid
components in the (*) fluid-mosaic model. Multiple ion channels are
located in this structure, which is primarily composed of a
phospholipid bilayer. For ten points, name this semi-permeable
structure that surrounds and encloses cells. John Stuart {Mill} One
work by this man claims that a stationary state is preferable to
perpetual economic growth because the latter destroys the environment
and leads to a lower quality of life, while he argues that individual
liberty leads to moral development in another of his works which
advocates for equality of the sexes. Though not Malthus, this author
of Principles of Political Economy and The (*) Subjection of Women
supported free speech in a work which also proposes that individual
are free to act as long as others are not hurt according to his “harm
principle.” This author of On Liberty advocated for the “rule” form of
a consequentialist idea pioneered by Jeremy Bentham which strives to
achieve the greatest good for the greatest number. For ten points,
name this proponent of utilitarianism. Albert {Pujols} (accept José
Alberto {Pujols} Alcántara) The man was awarded the “Hope” Award
during Glenn Beck’s Restoring Honor Rally due to his charity work,
because previously in 2005, he and his wife Deidre launched their
namesake Family Foundation to raise awareness of Down Syndrome and aid
poor families in his home country. At the end of the 2011 season, he
ranked 37th in number of home runs in MLB history, after joining Babe
Ruth and (*) Reggie Jackson as the only players to have hit 3 home
runs in a World Series Game. For ten points, name this first baseman
who signed a $254 million dollar contract with the Los Angeles Angels
after obtaining his second World Series ring with the St. Louis
Cardinals. {granite} The “obicular” type of this rock has
concentrically layered, spheroidal structures and is mostly found in
Finland. The I-type and S-type of these rocks are much more common
than their M-type, which form through fractional crystallization, and
Chappell and White developed a notable classification system for them.
This rock is found in the upper left of the plutonic QAPF diagram, and
like pegmatite, this rock can metamorphose into (*) greisen. This
coarse-grained rock is mainly composed of feldspars and quartz, and
the extrusive variant of this rock is rhyolite. It is less dense than
basalt, which explains why oceanic plates sink beneath continental
plates at subduction zones.  For ten points, name this intrusive
igneous rock that is often used in countertops. {Peasants’} Revolt
(accept Wat {Tyler}’s Rebellion before mention; accept logical
equivalents of “revolt”) This event was triggered after Robert Belknap
was attacked at Brentwood. The passage of the Statute of Labourers led
to this event, during which Robert Hales and Simon of Sudbury were
executed. One side in this event was assisted by Jack Straw and John
Ball, and during this event, the palace of (*) John of Gaunt was
destroyed. The leader of this event was tricked into a meeting at
Miles End, where he was murdered by John Cavendish and William
Walworth, the mayor of London. This event was caused by a poll tax
levied by Richard II. For ten points, identify this English revolt of
1381 which was led by Wat Tyler. {Pride and Prejudice} One character
in this work tours Pemberley while residing in the Gardiner’s
residence, and later, Lady Catherine attempts to dissuade that
character from marrying her nephew. Charlotte Lucas marries the
ostentatious Mr. Collins after he is previously rejected by the
protagonist of this novel, while another character marries a
disappointed Mr. (*) Wickham. That character is a sister of the
protagonist, Lydia, while another sister, Jane, finally receives a
marriage proposal from Mr. Bingley. For ten points, name this novel in
which Fitzwilliam Darcy finally marries Elizabeth Bennet, the most
famous work of Jane Austen. {Swan Lake} The composer of this work used
material from his abandoned opera The Voyevada for its Grand adage and
Valse des fiancées, and he regretted writing it after listening to Léo
Delibes’s ballet, Sylvia. The title location of this work was formed
by the tears of the female lead’s parents after she was abducted, and
is visited by the protagonist on a hunting trip with his best friend,
Benno. That character, Prince (*) Siegfried, is later tricked by the
bird-sorcerer Von Rothbart into mistakenly swearing his love for his
daughter Odile. For ten points, name this ballet composed by Pyotr
Ilyich Tchaikovsky, in which Odette is turned into the title white
bird. Gilbert Newton {Lewis} This man found that tetratomic oxygen is
formed in solutions of oxygen in liquid nitrogen, and collaborated
with Merle Randall in a work titled “Thermodynamics and the Free
Energy of Chemical Substances.” His photochemical experiments led him
to coin the term “photons,” and he was the first person to produce a
pure sample of (*) deuterium oxide. In 1916, this man wrote a paper
titled “The Atom and the Molecule,” in which he presented his theories
about free radicals and the covalent bond. For ten points, name this
American chemist who described compounds accepting or donating
electron pairs in his namesake acid-base theory and created his
namesake dot structures. {Molière} (or Jean-Baptiste {Poquelin}) This
author wrote a play in which Dorante secretly shares his high views of
an aristocratic life with Mr. Jourdain. He wrote another work in which
Valere is falsely accused of being a thief by the cook Master Jacques,
and both Harpagon and Cleante love Mariane. Another of his works
details the pompous Acaste and the gossiping Clitandre, who fight for
the affection of Celimene with the protagonist, Alceste, who
eventually gives up his love to become a hermit. This author of The
(*) Bourgeois Gentleman is perhaps most famous for a work in which the
title hypocrite becomes arrested after seducing Damis’ mother Elmire
in Orgon’s estate. For ten points, name this French author of The
Miser, The Misanthrope, and Tartuffe. {thyroid} gland This structure
is attached to the cricoid cartilage by the ligament of Berry, and
mutations in the CTLA-4 gene can trigger T-cells to attack this
structure’s Hürthle cells in another autoimmune disease. The
parafollicular cells of this structure secrete a hormone which helps
regulate blood calcium levels, while hormones secreted by its
follicular cells regulate the rate of metabolism. (*) Hashimoto’s
disease affects this structure, while cretinism results from a loss of
function in it. Hyperactivity of this gland can result in Graves’
disease. This gland secretes calcitonin and T3 and can be enlarged due
to a deficiency of iodine. For ten points, name this butterfly-shaped
gland located in front of the trachea which is affected by goiter and
secretes thyroxine. Abraham Harold {Maslow} This man claimed that
“good human beings will generally need a good society in which to
grow” in The Farther Reaches of Human Nature. This thinker studied
various famous people, such as Aldous Huxley and Albert Einstein to
construct his most most famous theory, which actually included ideas
from Kurt Goldstein’s The Organism. This author of (*) Toward a
Psychology of Being and Motivation and Personality used the term,
“peak experiences” to describe moments of extreme happiness, and his
most famous theory ranks esteem, food, and love. For ten points, name
this American professor and humanistic psychologist who placed self-
actualization as the highest in his hierarchy of needs. {sphere}
(accept {ball} before mentioned) Kepler’s Conjecture postulates that
these objects can be packed with a density of approximately 74%. The
Banach-Tarski paradox states that a solid one of these objects can be
cut into finitely many pieces and re-assembled into two copies of the
same size as the original. For a  non-Euclidean geometry occurring on
these objects, triangles have angle sum greater than 180 degrees. (*)
Archimedes derived the formula for the volume of this figure by noting
that it occupied two-thirds of the volume of its circumscribed
cylinder. This figure has surface area equal to four pi times the
radius squared, and volume four-thirds pi times radius cubed. For ten
points, name this three-dimensional analogue of a circle, the outer
surface of a ball. {dragon}s (accept {serpent}s or {snake}s) Ra’s
greatest enemy is depicted as one of these animals, who also pull the
chariot of Triptolemus. In Hindu mythology, the eagle Garuda serves as
the nemesis of these creatures, which are known as Nagas.  Susano’o
killed one of these creatures and pulled the sword Grasscutter from
its tail, and another one with a hundred heads guarded the golden
apples of the Hesperides. Besides (*) Yamato-no-Orochi and Ladon,
another example of these creatures chews on the roots of Yggdrasil and
is named Nidhogg. One named Jormangandr encircles the globe, and
another belonging to Ares had its teeth sown into the ground by
Cadmus. For ten points, name these reptiles that breathe fire in
European mythology. {Madame Butterfly} or {Madama Butterfly} The
protagonist of this opera asks when robins make their nests “C’e.
Entrate,” and she names her son Dolore, meaning “sorrow.” That
character was earlier condemned by her uncle, Bonze, for converting to
Christianity. The main tenor  in this work purchases a house for 999
years, with the right to cancel the agreement every month; that
character is introduced to the title character by the (*) marriage
broker Goro, but deserts her to marry an American woman, Kate. The
American Consul Sharpless talks with title character at the end of
this opera, before she commits seppuku. Lieutenant Pinkerton abandons
his Japanese wife Cio-Cio San in, for ten points, what opera, a work
of Giocomo Puccini? Herbert Clark {Hoover} As a mining engineer, this
man traveled to China and guided U.S. Marines at Tianjin. He was
appointed by president Wilson as head of the U.S. Food Administration,
and urged people to save food for soldiers on “meatless Mondays” and
“wheatless Wednesdays.” He established the Reconstruction Finance
Corporation while in office, and one of his opponents declared “there
is nothing in [him] but jelly” in response to his order for (*)
Douglas MacArthur to break up the Bonus Army. He defeated Al Smith in
a landslide in the 1928 presidential election. For ten points,
identify this president whose poor response to Black Tuesday at the
beginning of the Great Depression led him to be succeeded in 1932 by
FDR. {P}ercy Bysshe {Shelley} (Prompt on “Shelley”) This author meets
Murder, Fraud, and Hypocrisy as he “walk[s] in the vision of Poesy” in
a poem inspired by the Peterloo Massacre. In addition to “The Masque
of Anarchy,” this man wrote a poem in which he urges others to weep
for the title character’s death after he reached “Beacons from the
abode where the Eternal are.” In a more famous poem, this author asks,
“If (*) winter comes, can spring be far behind?” while in another poem
he comments that the title entity is happier than humans as it has not
“hate, and pride, and fear”. For ten points, name this poet of
“Adonais,” “Ode to the West Wind,” and “To a Skylark,” who was married
to the author of Frankenstein. John {Dalton} This man discovered that
rainfall occurred due to reductions in temperature, and also
determined the composition of ether, finding its correct formula. In
his Meteorological Observations, this man observed that air was not a
chemical solvent, but rather a mechanical system, where each of the
constituent gases would behave as they would independently. By
combining (*) nitric oxide with oxygen, he also discovered how two
elements in a compound will always combine in the same, whole number
ratio, thus establishing his Law of Multiple Proportions as well as
his atomic theory. The atomic mass unit is named after, for ten
points, which English scientist who formulated a namesake law of
partial pressures? Michelangelo Merisi da {Caravaggio} In one of this
artist’s works, a boy with black, puffy hair looks at the viewer and
has a skin color very similar to the peach he holds. In addition to
painting Boy with a Basket of Fruit, this artist depicted a man
dressed in green with a torn glove peeking at a boy’s hand in (*)
Cardsharps. In a more famous painting, this artist depicted two old
innkeepers dressed in white serving three men around a table; one of
the men, Jesus, outstretches his arm and looks downward. His most
famous work shows Jesus alongside St. Peter, who summons the title
character under a diagonal beam of light. For ten points, name this
Italian artist of The Supper at Emmaus and The Calling of St. Matthew.
{bit}s (accept {binary digit} before  mention) One of these units is
roughly equal to three decibans, and BLIT operations copy these into a
rectangular area. A raster operator combines two arrays of these units
to form a this-map image. A caret is used in most programming
languages to toggle one of these, while a single vertical bar
represents a this “wise” OR operation. The (*) quantum type of this
unit allows it to be a superposition of its two classical values, and
bandwidth measures the rate of the transfer of them. Four of these
units make up a nibble, while eight of them constitute a byte. For ten
points, name this unit of digital information commonly interpreted as
a binary digit. {slave revolt}s (accept equivalents of “revolt;”
prompt on only “revolt” or equivalents; accept equivalents of “slave”
such as “serf”) One of these events was led by Tunni against the
Swedish king Ongentheow, and another of these events was ended by
Alexander Suvorov’s victory at Tsaritsyn. Cato led 20 Kongolese in an
armed march down the Stono River in another one of these events. One
of these events ended after Crassus defeated its (*) gladiator leader.
Another of these events occurred on a Spanish schooner off the coast
of Cuba, and one in Southampton Country, Virginia led to the execution
of 56 African participants. For ten points, identify these events
exemplified by the Spartacus revolt, the mutiny on the Amistad, and a
rebellion led by Nat Turner. Ernest {Hemingway} One short story by
this man sees the title character killed on a safari by his wife
Margot. One novel by this man features the prostitute Georgette
Leblanc, and in that novel, the protagonist meets the boxing champion
Robert Cohn. That novel by this author of “The Short Happy Life of
Francis Macomber” sees Lady Brett Ashely unable to become intimate
with the impotent protagonist (*) Jake Barnes. The DiMaggio-loving
protagonist dreams about lions in another work by this author, and
that character had not caught a single fish for 84 days until a huge
marlin comes up to his ship. For ten points, name this author of The
Old Man and the Sea and The Sun Also Rises. {Malaysia} Mount Korbu
lies in this country’s Titiwangsa Mountains, while its Crocker Range
contains Mount Tambuyukon. Sibu lies on this country’s longest river,
the Rajang. Major cities in this country include Ipoh and Kuching, and
coral reefs attract tourists to its Sipadan Island and Swallow Reef.
This country’s Gunung Mulu National Park is located in (*) Sarawak,
and Mount Kinabalu lies in the state of Sabah. This country’s biggest
city lies in the Klang valley, and landmarks within its capital
include the Istana Negara, the KL Tower, and the world-famous Petronas
Towers. The Straits of Johor separate this country from Singapore, and
it shares Borneo with Brunei and Indonesia. For ten points, name this
southeast Asian country which has its capital at Kuala Lumpur.
{Syria}n Arab Republic Like Morocco, this country saw nationwide
protests on its March 2011 “Day of Dignity.” In June, this nation’s
town of Jisr al-Shughour [Jiss-ER AL shu- GH-ur] was attacked by rebel
gangs who killed 120 people. This country’s security forces responded
by encircling the city with tanks and killing civilians. In November,
the Arab League (*) levied harsh economic sanctions on this country.
Violent protests currently are taking place in this country’s cities
of Hama, Daraa, and Homs. For ten points, name this country run by the
dictator Bashar al-Assad, the capital of which is Damascus. {Gupta}
Empire One ruler from this empire was told to give up his wife,
Dhruvswamini, in order to have peace with the Sakas led by Rudrasimha
III. Another ruler from this dynasty erected an Iron Pillar, which
revealed that the ruler would take the name, Vikramaditya, to depict
the greatness of his successes. Under the ruler (*) Skanda, this
empire faced many threats from the White Huns to the north. It
included the playwright Kalidasa and the Kama Sutra was made during
this dynasty. For ten points, name this early Indian empire that
lasted from 320 to 550 C.E., founded by Chandra. {special relativity}
(prompt on partial, do not accept “general relativity”) The
mathematical framework for this theory was laid when Henri Poincaré
proved that Lorentz transformations are a subset of his namesake
group, preserving the symmetries of the flat space-time of the four-
dimensional Minkowski space, not curved by any gravitational forces.
It leads to the famous equation that (*) E equals m c-squared, and it
expanded Galileo’s earlier work by including the fact that the speed
of light is the same in all reference frames. For ten points, identify
this theory of Albert Einstein, developed in 1905 along with a
similarly-named “general” type. Naguib {Mahfouz} This author wrote
about title character’s lovers Margaret and Warda and his friendship
with the socialist Othman in The Beggar. In another of his novels,
Elwan is engaged to Randa and kills his boss after hearing about the
assassination of Anwar Sadat, while in another, the cafe owner Tarzan
befriends the recently released thief Said Mahran. This author of The
Day The Leader Was Killed and The (*) Thief and the Dogs is most
famous for a series of novels following the family of Abd al-Jawad
from the Egyptian Revolution to the end of World War II:  Palace Walk,
Palace of Desire, and Sugar Street. For ten points, identify this
Egyptian author of the Cairo Trilogy. {Cain} (or {Qabil} or {Qayen})
According to Midrash, the motivation for this person’s most famous
action was his dislike of Jumelia and desire to marry his twin sister
Aclima. Mormon leader David Patten claimed to have encountered this
man during his endless wandering, recognizing him by the mark put on
him to prevent him from being killed. He was born right after his
parents were expelled from the (*) Garden of Eden, and God rejected
the sacrifice of his crops while accepting the sacrifice of his
brother’s livestock. For ten points, identify this eldest son of Adam
and Eve who asked “Am I my brother’s keeper?” after slaying Abel.
{Battle Hymn of the Tiger Mother} In this book, the narrator concedes
that she met a white guy from South Dakota who passes her “test.” That
narrator’s first daughter found out that it would not be fun to do
something until she was good at it after being forced to practice
violin three hours a day. One character, (*) Jed, is a Jewish
professor of law at Yale, and the narrator’s second daughter Lulu
easily “flies into a rage.” The mother calls her children garbage at a
dinner party and tries to get away with it by calling it a “Chinese
immigrant thing.” For ten points, name this book by Amy Chua about
Asian parenting. Vladamir {Putin} Upon taking office, this man
declared Aslan Maskhadov’s Chechen government illegitimate, and he
later gave medals to the soldiers who “accidentally” killed Maskhadov.
This man was recently booed at a boxing match and said that a diplomat
gave a “good signal” to his opponents. The owner of the New Jersey
Nets recently announced he would run in an election against this man,
who, after (*) Boris Yelstin resigned, became acting president of his
country. In 2008, he declined to run for a third term as president,
but in December 2011, he announced he would once again run. For ten
points, name this Russian politician who is the current prime minister
of Russia. {coagulation} or {clotting} Coumarin derivatives, such as
phenprocoumon, can inhibit this process by blocking the enzyme VKORC,
and the aPTT and PT tests can be used to measure the efficiency of
proteins involved in this process. Hageman and von Willebrand name
factors involved in this process, and the absence of another of its
factors can cause Christmas disease. Fibrinogen is converted into
fibrin during this process by (*) thrombin, the proteolytical cleavage
of which begins this process’s namesake “cascade.” Thrombosis refers
to when this process occurs inside an uninjured blood vessel, and this
process is impaired in patients with hemophilia. Platelets aggregate
during this process, which typically results in a scab. For ten
points, name this process by which blood congeals after an injury.
{Baha’i} Faith (or {Baha’i}sm) One text in this religion advocates its
followers to “cleanse themselves of all that is earthly” for those who
seek truth and faith, and this religion’s only guardian, Shoghi
Effendi, is credited to translating another text in this religion, the
Epistle to the Son of the Wolf. Its calendar consists of 19 months,
each consisting of 19 days, and it advocates all men to observe a
19-day fast. This religion’s (*) Universal House of Justice can be
found in Haifa, Israel, and its Book of Certitude claims religion grew
through a series of divine messengers including Buddha, Jesus, and
Muhammad. For ten points, identify this religion founded by the
Baha’u’llah. {Romance of the Three Kingdoms} (accept {San Guo Yan Yi})
One scene from this work sees a main character fend off an army of
150,000 by opening all the city gates and faking an ambush. Earlier,
that same character is able to produce 100,000 arrows in one night by
sailing ships filled with straw into enemy territory under the cover
of fog. This novel begins with three men swearing an oath of
brotherhood in the peach garden, and sees warlord Dong Zhuo
assassinated by his foster son (*) Lu Bu. After the Battle of Xiapi,
Lu Bu is hanged by general Cao Cao (“tzow-tzow”), who later faces a
major setback when his chained ships are burned at the Battle of Red
Cliffs. For ten points, identify this historical novel about the
tumultuous title era in Chinese history, a work by Luo Guanzhong.
{Florida} This state contains Singer Island and Anna Maria Island, and
its Big Talbot Island is a state park. This state’s highest point is
Britton Hill, and it is home to the Rim Canal and the Seven Mile
Bridge. Dry Tortugas National Park lies in this state, which shares
(*) Okefenokee Swamp with its northern neighbor and contains the
Kissimmee River. This state’s Cape Canaveral is home to the Kennedy
Space Center. Big Cypress Swamp, Fort Lauderdale, Tampa Bay, Epcot,
and the Everglades all lie within this state. For ten points, name
this Sunshine State home to Key West, with capital at Tallahassee. The
{Divine Comedy} (or {Divina Commedia}; accept {Purgatoria} or
{Purgatory} before “Mars” is read, afterwards prompt on specific
sections like Inferno, Purgatoria, or Paradiso) An angel in this work
etches the letter “P” into the narrator’s head, and in another
section, those who die bravely for Christianity are sent to Mars.
Beginning with the line, "Nel mezzo del cammin di nostra vita”, this
work sees Caselia play music as others enter and another scene shows a
character grind Ruggeiri’s head. The narrator of this work meets Count
Ugolino and Montefeltro, and describes the fate of Francesca. Seeing
an icy area named (*) Cocytus, this work includes the line, "Abandon
all hope, ye who enter here." The narrator is guided through Heaven by
his love Beatrice and led through Purgatory and Hell by Vergil in, for
ten points, what epic by Dante Alighieri? {Mars} [do not accept “Ares”
at any point”] This god was worshipped with Vulcan at the trumpet-
cleaning ceremony known as the Tubilustria. In the time of Numa
Pompilius, he purportedly made eleven shields rain down from the sky.
Flora helped this fatherless deity’s mother give birth. Augustus named
one temple after this god, who also names the field the Pantheon is
located on,  and worshipped him as the avenger Ultor.  One of this
god’s sacred birds was the (*) woodpecker, and the Vestal Virgin Rhea
Silvia was raped by this father of Romulus and Remus. This god was
caught in bed with Venus by her husband Vulcan. For ten points, name
this son of Juno, the Roman god of war and counterpart of Ares.
{speed} of {sound} (accept equivalents, accept {Mach 1} before
mentioned) In air it is equal to the square root of the adiabatic
index times the gas law constant times temperature divided by molar
mass, and Prandtl and Glauert suggested that approaching this quantity
would lead to infinite pressure. This quantity for a gas is not
dependent on pressure or density, but rather on temperature, which is
why it is generally lower as one gets higher in the atmosphere. This
quantity is equal to about (*) 340 meters per second in room
temperature air, and the ratio of an object’s speed to this quantity
is its Mach number. For ten points, what is this quantity, the measure
of how fast a certain type of wave can reach our ears? {Pictures at an
Exhibition} (accept “of” or “from” instead of “at”) The composer of
this work intended for a minor setting of its opening theme to depict
pale light radiating from skulls, and its penultimate movement
includes continuous 16th note triplet tremolos in its andante section
as well as series of rising octaves in its allegro sections, which
depict a witch’s flight. Staccato grace notes represent unhatched
chickens in this work’s fifth movement, and its “Promenade” theme
features alternating bars of  5/4 and 6/4 time. This work was notably
orchestrated by (*) Maurice Ravel, and includes movements such as “The
Hut on Fowl’s Legs” and “The Great Gates of Kiev.” Viktor Hartmann’s
paintings inspired, for ten points, which piano suite composed by
Modest Mussorgsky? {Nebuchadnezzar} II (or {Nebuchadrezzar} II or
{Nabû-kudurri-uṣur}) This ruler’s ambassador Nabonidus was successful
in negotiating conflicts between the Medes and Lydians. This man was
succeeded by his son Awil-Marduk, and he constructed the Esagila and
the Ishtar Gate to restore his empire’s glory. This ruler’s victory at
the Battle of Carchemish ended the Assyrian Empire. This son of (*)
Nabopolassar captured King Jehoikim and destroyed the First Temple
during his conquest of Judah and Jerusalem, after which he forced the
Jews into exile. For ten points, name this Neo-Babylonian king, most
famous for his construction of the Hanging Gardens of Babylon.
{Aristotle} This man argued that the human mind is immortal because it
acts without a bodily organ in On the Soul, and included the
spectacle, or opsis, in the six elements of tragedy in another work.
Francis Bacon wrote a notable response to this man’s collection of six
works on logic, his Organon, and this thinker argued that society
forms for the sake of noble actions. This author of (*) Poetics and
Politics described the prime-mover God in his Metaphysics and stated
that the highest aim of humans is happiness in his Nicomachean Ethics.
The Lyceum was founded by, for ten points, which ancient Greek
philosopher, a student of Plato and a tutor of Alexander the Great?
George {Clooney} In one movie, this actor had a bitter jedi rivalry
with Larry Cooper because he was interested in the dark side. Earlier
in that movie, Jeff Bridges comes back from a spiritual journey with a
ponytail and gets this actor to join his New Earth Army. He directed
Good Night, and Good Luck, and starred opposite Meryl Streep in a
movie about foxes.  He got his first big break as Doug Ross on ER, and
took on Frank Sinatra’s former role in a movie about a (*) heist. In
that film, he played a recently paroled crook looking to rob three
casinos, and starred alongside Brad Pitt, Matt Damon, and Julia
Roberts. For ten points, name this actor who is known for his roles in
Men Who Stare at Goats, Fantastic Mr. Fox, Michael Clayton, and
Ocean’s Eleven. Willa Sibert {Cather} This author wrote a novel in
which Dr. Archi takes care of Thea, who later falls in love with Fred
Ottenberg. In another work by this author, Joseph Valliant and Jean
Latour travel from Ohio to New Mexico. In addition to The Song of the
Lark and (*) Death Comes for the Archbishop, this author wrote a work
in which the Nebraskan Jim Burden falls in love and has an affair with
the title character, and another work in which Frank Shabata murders
Mary and Carl Lindstrum marries Alexandra Bergson. For ten points,
name this author of My Antonia and O Pioneers! planetary {ring}s These
entities generally form inside the Roche limit, and bodies inside that
limit will become one of these unless they are being held together by
tensile strength. Rhea was the first satellite discovered to have
these features. One of these entities named after John Couch Adams can
be found near Neptune, and Phobos is predicted to form one of these in
50 million years. One designated (*) “F” is “shepherded” by Prometheus
and Pandora, while one of these entities named Phoebe is tilted at an
angle of 27 degrees relative to the other ones of Saturn. They are
generally thought to form from the material of the protoplanetary
accretion disc that do not coalesce to form moons. For ten points,
name these flat, disk-shaped collections of small particles orbiting a
planet. The {Birth of Venus} (Accept anything suggesting Venus being
born) In William-Adolphe Bougereau’s depiction of this scene, the
central figure brushes fingers through her hair. In Cabanel’s version,
the title figure reclines on her left side while five cherubs fly
above her, two of which are blowing conch shells. In the best-known
painting of this event, Chloris clings to (*) Zephyrus while a woman
on the right throws a cloth over the naked title figure, who stands
impossibly on a half-shell. For ten points, name this scene depicting
the emergence of a certain goddess of love from a body of water, the
most famous one of which was painted by Botticelli. {Four Color}
Theorem Generalizations of this problem include the Hadwiger
Conjecture, and Apollonian networks have a unique solution to this
problem. The 15-node Poussin graph exhibited a flaw in a supposed
proof of this statement by “tangling” Kempe chains, but Heawood used
Kempe’s work to prove a 25% weaker bound on this problem. The proof of
this conjecture required verifying (*) 1,936 separate cases. It was
finally proven in 1976 by Wolfgang Haken and Kenneth Appel with the
aid of a computer. For ten points, identify this mathematical problem,
which states that any map with contiguous regions can be colored with
less than five colors. Pancho {Villa} (accept José Doroteo {Arango}
Arámbula or Francisco {Villa}) Ambrose Bierce witnessed this man’s
victory at the Battle of Tierra Blanca over the forces of Salazar, and
he also commissioned the first horse ambulances as head of the
Division of the North. This man joined forces with Pascual Orozco to
win the First Battle of Ciudad Juárez, and strongly supported
Fransisco Madero in his attempts to oust Porifio Díaz from power. He
joined the rebellion against (*) Victoriano Huerta, but felt betrayed
by president Wilson’s decision to support Carranza, resulting in his
attacks on the towns of Santa Isabel and Chihuahua.General Pershing
was unable to capture, for ten points, what Mexican bandit who led a
raid on the American town of Columbus, New Mexico? Herbert George
"H.G." {Wells} In one of this author’s novels, the ironclad HMS
Thunder Child is destroyed after providing a safe passage from Essex,
while in another, the Ape Man leads the protagonist through a jungle
where they find half-animal and half-human creatures. This author who
wrote about Edward Prendick in The (*) Island of Doctor Moreau wrote a
work in which the protagonist encounters the child-like Eloi and the
savage Morlock and begins by discussing the fourth dimension, and he
authored another work in which Martians invade London. For ten points,
name this this English author of The Invisible Man, The Time Machine,
and The War of the Worlds. United States {Secretary of State} Holders
of this position are responsible for receiving written communication
from the President when he resigns, and the second one presented the
Virginia Plan. Madeleine Albright was the first woman to hold this
post, and George Marshall created his namesake plan after World War II
while holding this position. The first holder of this position, (*)
Thomas Jefferson, was appointed by Washington and notably opposed the
views of the Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton, while others who
were given this title include Colin Powell and Condoleezza Rice. For
ten points, identify this cabinet position in charge of conducting
foreign affairs for the United States, a post currently held by
Hillary Clinton. {ear}s (prompt on specific parts of the ear like
“cochlea” or “eardrum”) Darwinian tubules are vestigial muscles found
on this structure. This structure is affected by Ménière’s disease,
and can also be damaged by ototoxins.  Signals from this structure are
sent through the eighth cranial nerve by its organ of Corti. A waxy
substance called cerumen forms in this organ, and sensory information
from this organ is processed by the (*) temporal lobe. Vertigo is
caused by problems in a snail-shaped part of it, and bones in this
organ include the malleus and stapes, the latter of which moves fluid
within this structure’s cochlea. Its tympanic membrane, also known as
this organ’s “drum,” is vibrated by sound waves. For ten points, name
this auditory organ. {Snell}ius’s Law This law was originally
discovered by the Arabic Ibn Shal, and it can be derived from Fermat’s
Least Time Principle, since a ray of light will follow a path to a
point that minimizes time, not distance, causing a kinked path. The
equation in this law cannot be satisfied above the “critical angle,”
leading to (*) total internal reflection, and that equation states
that the ratio of the sines of two angles is proportional to the ratio
of the two speeds of light. For ten points, identify this law named
after its Dutch formulator, which can find the angle of refraction as
light passes through two different mediums. Alan {Paton} One of this
author’s works includes the chapters “The Holy Church of Zion” and
“The Defiance Campaign.” Another of this author’s novels begins
“Perhaps I could have saved him, with only a word...but I never spoke”
and is about police officer Peter van Vlaanderen. This author of Ah,
But Your Land is Beautiful and (*) Too Late, the Phalarope wrote a
novel in which a letter from Theophilus Msimangu informs the
protagonist that Gertrude is ill. When the protagonist arrives, he
learns of the murder of Arthur Jarvis by his son Abaslom. For ten
points, identify this South African author most famous for a novel
about Stephen Kumalo, Cry, the Beloved Country. {T}heodore “Teddy”
{Roosevelt} (prompt on partial) This man’s travels in Brazil would
later result in the Rio da Duvida being named after him. He signed the
Gentleman’s Agreement with Japan, and John Schrank attempted to
assassinate this man while he was giving a speech. He appointed
Gifford Pinchot as head of the US Forestry Service and also increased
railroad regulations by signing the (*) Elkins and Hepburn Acts. This
man brought a suit against the Northern Securities Company and led the
Rough Riders in the charge up San Juan Hill in the Spanish American
War. For ten points, name this founder of the Bull Moose party, a US
president who implemented a “Square Deal” and succeeded the
assassinated McKinley. {Bioshock} One character in this video game
claims, “A man chooses, a slave obeys.” In one ending to this game,
the aged player is surrounded on his deathbed by five adult women he
had saved. This game’s Dr. Tenenbaum discovered a slug that can be
implanted in the stomachs of girls from Frank Fontaine’s orphanages.
This game begins with a (*) plane crash in the middle of the ocean
near a lighthouse, followed by the protagonist discovering Andrew
Ryan’s underwater city Rapture. For ten points, name this 2007
videogame where the protagonist, Jack, fights enemies such as
“Splicers” and “Big Daddies” to rescue “Little Sisters” and can
genetically engineer himself with “Plasmids.” {Voodoo} (accept
{Vodun}, {Vodoun}, and {Vodou}) Novices of this religion must complete
the pile fey and bathe with clothes on in an initiation ceremony
called Kanzo. Devotees of this religion believe in a love deity named
Erzulie, an evil spirit named Baka, and a storm deity called Shango.
Temples of this religion are called “Hounfour”, and they house the
priests collectively called “Houngans.” Its chief deity is (*) Bondye,
and devotees of this religion pray to spirits like Baron Samedi and
Papa Legba, known as Loas. For ten points, name this syncretic
religion practiced in Haiti, that includes zombies and sticking pins
in namesake dolls. {Umayyad} Caliphate (accept equivalents to
“Caliphate” like “Empire” or “Dynasty”) While Hisham was ruler of this
empire, it suffered a defeat from the Byzantines at the Battle of
Akroinon, causing Hisham to be succeeded by his brother Yazid II.
Under the rule of Marwan II, this empire moved its capital to Harran,
and this dynasty’s rule ended after the Battle of Zab. Charles Martel
defeated this dynasty’s Abdul Rahman at the Battle of (*) Tours, but
this empire still kept Cordoba, and it ruled from Spain all the way to
the western tips of India. For ten points, name this first Islamic
caliphate with capital at Damascus that was followed by the Abbasids.
Eugene Gladstone {O’Neill} This author wrote a play in which Mildred
faints after witnessing the cursing Yank, who later dies after opening
the cage of the title creature. This author also wrote about Nina, who
bears a child with Ned Darrell rather than Sam Evans. In addition to
writing The Hairy Ape and Strange Interlude, this author wrote a work
in which the murderer Brutus becomes king of a Caribbean island, but
is shot with a (*) silver bullet. This author of The Emperor Jones
also wrote a play in which a group waits for Theodore Hickman in Harry
Hope’s saloon and a more famous work concerns the tuberculosis-
infected Edmund and the morphine addict Mary Tyrone. For ten points,
name this playwright of The Iceman Cometh and Long Day’s Journey Into
Night. Federal Republic of {Germany} (or {Bundesrepublik Deutschland})
One politician from this country covered up a loan from millionaire
Egon Geerkens. On March 18th, 2012, this country elected Joachim Gauck
to replace disgraced President Christian Wulff. The current leader of
this country claimed that multiculturalism had “utterly failed” due to
the recent influx of (*) Turkish Muslims. The two main parties in this
country are the Social Democratic and the Christian Democratic. For
ten points, identify this largest economy in the European Union, which
Chancellor Angela Merkel leads from its capital at Berlin. {Helios}
[do not accept {Sol}, accept {Apollo} before “golden goblet”] This god
rejected the advances of the nymph Clytie and eventually turned her
into a flower. Emperor Julian the Apostate attempted to revive worship
of this Greek deity in the Roman empire and he gave Heracles a golden
goblet after he threatened to shoot this god. His daughters turned
themselves into poplar trees and flowed tears of amber after their
brother died and fell into the river Eridanus. This father of the
witch (*) Circe gave a dragon-pulled chariot to his granddaughter
Medea after she killed her two sons. Odysseus’ men were killed for
eating the sacred cattle of this deity, whose son was responsible for
blackening the Ethiopian people. That son was killed by Zeus after he
failed to control a celestial chariot. For ten points, name this
father of Phaeton, the Greek god of the sun. {Stendhal} (or Marie-
Henri {Beyle}) In one work by this author, Octave de Malivert dies of
sorrow in Greece after he is rejected by Zohiloff; that work is
Armance. In a more famous work, the protagonist gets imprisoned in the
Farnese Tower after murdering a manager, but is rescued by Aunt Gina,
who later marries Count Mosca. That protagonist himself comes to love
Clelia Conti, who dies a few months after their child passes away. In
his most famous work, the protagonist shoots Madame de (*) Renal after
she exposes his previous affair, which leads Marquis to cancel his
marriage with his lover, Mathilde de la Mole. For ten points, name
this author who wrote about Fabrizio del Dongo in The Charterhouse of
Parma and about Julien Sorel in The Red and the Black. {Luncheon on
the Grass} (Accept Le {Dejeuner sur l’herbe}) Two figures in the
central group of this painting mimic the ones found in Raimondi’s
engravement of The Judgement of Paris, while the main figure was
modeled after the painter’s wife, Suzanne Leenhoff. A rowboat can be
seen in the background of this painting, and a woman with a tilted
head picks up something from the ground. A basket of fruit and a (*)
yellow hat rest on the ground in front of the central group, and two
men in black casually converse with one another. The main figure of
this painting rests her head on her hand and looks directly at the
viewer; unlike the men, she is naked. For ten points, name this
painting about the title meal, by Edouard Manet. {Ivan the Terrible}
(or {Ivan IV}; or {Ivan Grozny}; or {Ivan Vasilyevich}; prompt on
“Ivan”) Yermak Timofeyevich explored Siberia in the name of this
ruler. This ruler conquered Kazan and Astrakhan but was defeated by
Stephen Batory and Sigismund II in the Livonian War. He abdicated his
throne to Simeon Bekbulatovich for a year. This ruler organized the
streltsy, suppressed the power of aristocratic families with his
oprichnina, and called the first “assembly of the land,” or (*)
zemsky-sobor. This Rurik ruler accidentally killed his chosen heir,
which forced him to appoint the mentally disabled Feodor I as his
successor instead. For ten points, identify this first Russian tsar
who was known for his extreme cruelty. {lake}s A tarn is one of these
features that forms in a cirque, while paternoster ones are linked in
succession. The epilimnion and hypolimnions reverse seasonally in the
dimictic type of these entities, while holomictic ones are not
stratified. Limnic eruptions in these structures can increase their
carbon dioxide content, and oligotrophic ones lack primary
productivity. (*) Kettle ones are formed by retreating glaciers, and
the main source of outflow for endorheic ones is evaporation. Point
bars can form oxbow types of these structures from a meandering river,
and these features can also be formed when water collects in volcanic
calderas. For ten points, name these inland bodies of water
exemplified by freshwater ones in North America named Huron and
Superior, which are bigger than ponds. Commonwealth of
{Massaschusetts} This state’s highest point is Mount Greylock, which
lies in the Taconic Mountains near the Housatonic Valley. Its western
portion contains the Berkshires, and this state’s cities of
Northampton, Holyoke, and Springfield lie on the Connecticut River.
Olmsted Park, the Prudential Center, and the Old North Church are
located in this state’s largest city, which lies at the mouth of the
(*) Charles River. Other cities in this state include Worcester,
Lowell, and Plymouth. This state’s islands of Martha’s Vineyard and
Nantucket lie south of Cape Cod. It borders New Hampshire to the north
and Rhode Island to the south. For ten points, identify this New
England state with capital at Boston. {demand} This quantity is
relatively inelastic below the kink in the curve depicting it for an
oligopoly, and the Markovian type of it is often used to model
inventory control. The Slutsky identity relates two types of these
quantities which compensate for substitute and income effects, the
Marshallian and Hicksian types. Veblen and Giffen goods violate the
law of this quantity, and the (*) “aggregate” type of this quantity
refers to the total sum of it in an economy.  This quantity is usually
inversely related to price, and a surplus may result if it’s low. For
ten points, name this quantity, the amount of a good the public is
willing and able to buy, which is often paired with supply. {Korea}n
Peninsula Early periods in this region were known as the Jeulmun and
the Mumun and ancient kingdoms in this region used the “bone ranks”
system. Sejon the Great once ruled a “hermit kingdom” based in this
region. A general from this region’s Yi dynasty used “turtle boats” to
repel the fleet of Toyotomi Hideyoshi. This region was also home to
kingdoms such as (*) Silla and Goryeo, which were a part of this
region’s Three Kingdoms Period. One conflict which occurred in this
region ended at Panmunjom and included an invasion at Inchon. This
region’s North and South are separated by the DMZ along the 38th
Parallel. For ten points, identify this region whose two countries
have capitals Pyongyang and Seoul. {waltz}es (accept {valse} or
{walzer}) The first “Concert” one of these compositions by Alexander
Glazunov was notably arranged by Felix Blumenfield, and the second
movement of Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky’s sixth symphony is one of these
in the unusual 5/4 time. Franz Lehár’s The Merry Widow includes a
“Gold and Silver” one of these compositions, and Franz Liszt wrote
four of them titled (*) “Mephisto.” One of these compositions by
Frédéric Chopin evokes the image of a dog chasing his tale and is
actually longer than the “Minute” its title suggests, while another of
these compositions begins D-D-F sharp-A-A and is named after a river
that runs through Vienna. The Blue Danube is an example of, for ten
points, which musical form, a dance commonly in three-four time and
the “king of” which is Johann Strauss? Sir Walter {Scott} In one of
this author’s works, Edward chooses Rose Bradwardine over Flora Mac-
Ivor after taking part in the Battle of Prestonpans, while in another
work he wrote about Frank Osbaldistone’s marriage to Diana and his
various encounters with MacGregor. In addition to Waverly and (*) Rob
Roy, this author wrote a work in which the Presbyterian Jeannie Deans
travels to London, and in his most famous work, he wrote about a man
who saves Jewess Rebecca from burning and gets Cedric the Saxon’s
permission to marry Rowena. For ten points, name this author of The
Heart of Midlothian and Ivanhoe. Gregor {Mendel} Carl Correns
rediscovered this man’s theories after citing his work on hawkweeds.
This man accidentally created a new, dangerous strain of bees after
unsuccessfully mating them, and he also formulated the idea that
different traits are not passed along with each other, but rather are
inherited separately. This man also found that offspring receive only
one copy of a particular (*) gene from each parent; those are his Laws
of Independent Assortment and Segregation. For ten points, name this
Austrian monk whose breeding of pea plants led him to be known as “The
Father of Genetics”. {Hu} Jintao This man included the maxim "Live
plainly, work hard" as part of his Eight Honors and Eight Shames
program, and his Scientific Development Concept is aimed at producing
a “Harmonious Society.”  This leader named “twenty forbidden areas” of
television broadcasting, and he dismissed mayor (*) Meng Xuenong in
the aftermath of the SARS epidemic. He succeeded Jiang Zemin in his
current post, and his current Premier is Wen Jiabao. For ten points,
identify this current General Secretary of the Communist Party and
President of the People’s Republic of China. Battle of {Iwo Jima}
(accept {Operation Detachment} early) The only air attack at this
battle resulted in the sinking of the USS Bismarck Sea, and Major
Howard Connor credited the Navajo code talkers for their victory at
this battle. Also called Operation Detachment, one side’s defense
during this conflict was modeled after the Battle of Peleliu and was
led by General Tadamichi Kuribayashi, while men such as Ira Hayes and
John Bradley became famous for fighting in this battle thanks to the
actions of (*) Joe Rosenthal. It was responsible for one-third of all
Marine Corps casualties during World War II, and of the 22,000
Japanese forces, only 216 were taken prisoner. For ten points,
identify this island invasion which was immortalized by a photo
showing soldiers on Mount Suribachi raising the U.S. Flag. {butterfly
} In chemistry, this term names a transition state in the Prilezhaev
reaction, which describes a mechanism by which  peroxyacids and
alkenes react to form epoxides. The solar cycle can be visualized by
plotting sunspots on a diagram named for this entity. In chaos theory,
this term names an effect which posited that the formation of a (*)
hurricane could be contingent on the behavior of these entities. A
black and orange one of these exemplifies Müllerian mimicry because it
resembles another one of them that feeds on milkweed and is poisonous
to birds. For ten points, name this term which most commonly refers to
an insect, such as the Viceroy and Monarch ones, which emerges from
the chrysalis of a caterpillar. Maya {Angelou} (accept Marguerite Ann
{Johnson}) This author wrote “You may trod me in the very dirt/ But
still, like dust, I’ll rise” in one poem, and wrote of men who “liked
my smile, my wit, my hips” in another. That poem, “They Went Home” is
the first poem found in this author’s collection Just Give me a Cool
drink of water 'fore i diiie. This author also wrote a work that
commands the reader to say, “very simply, with hope, Good Morning”.
That work was read at (*) Bill Clinton’s inauguration, and was
entitled, “On the Pulse of Morning”. Her most famous work describes
the title creature that “leaps/ on the back of the wind/ and floats
downstream”. For ten points, name this American author of I Know Why
the Caged Bird Sings. {Fibonacci} sequence The sum of the first n
squares of these numbers is a product of two consecutive ones, and the
generating function for these numbers is x over the quantity one minus
x minus x-squared. These numbers are given by Binet’s formula. This
sequence satisfies the same pattern as the Lucas Sequence, and the
ratio of successive terms in this sequence approaches (*) phi, the
golden ratio. Many of these numbers appear in nature and this sequence
was originally used by Leonardo of Pisa to model the reproduction of
bunnies. For ten points, identify this sequence beginning one, one,
two, three, five, in which each term is the sum of the prior two.
{Nero} Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus (or {Nero} Claudius Drusus
Germanicus) During this figure’s rule, Rome annexed the Bosporan
Kingdom and his general Corbulo won control of Armenia from the
Parthians. He built a palace called the Golden House and sent
Vespasian to quell a revolt in Judaea. This emperor suppressed the
Vindex Rebellion and executed Seneca the Younger for his role in
Piso’s Conspiracy. The victory of his general Gaius Suetonius Paulinus
at the Battle of (*) Watling Street put down a rebellion of the Iceni
tribe led by Boudicca. His death heralded the Year of the Four
Emperors. He murdered his mother Agrippina the Elder and was preceded
by Claudius. For ten points, identify this Roman emperor who allegedly
“fiddled as Rome burned.” {Casablanca} In one scene in this film, a
singing of “La Marsallaise” causes a nightclub to be closed by the
Germans in retaliation. This film ends with one character walking away
on an airfield saying “I think this is the beginning of a beautiful
friendship” after he is asked to join the Free French Forces. The song
“As Time Goes By” is sung in another famous scene in which one
character says (*) “Play it once, Sam, for old times' sake.” For ten
points, name this iconic 1942 film in which Victor Lazlo and Ilsa Lund
try to convince her former lover, Rick, to give them letters of
transit from the title North African city, starring Ingrid Bergman and
Humphrey Bogart. {sodium bicarbonate} (accept {sodium hydrogen
carbonate} or {baking soda} or {NaHCO3} before read; do not accept or
prompt “sodium carbonate” or “baking powder”) This compound is found
naturally in minerals such as nahcolite, and it precipitates out of a
reaction between carbon dioxide, water, and soda ash. Along with
ammonium chloride, this compound is the product of an intermediary
step in the Solvay process, and it is used in dry chemical fire
extinguishers because it can undergo a dehydration reaction to produce
carbon dioxide. Found dissolved in (*) bile, this substance is used to
neutralize the stomach acid, and is also a common leavening agent. A
volcanic eruption can be visually represented by adding vinegar to,
for ten points, what white powder with chemical formula NaHCO3? The
{Tempest} This play formed the basis for W.H. Auden’s The Sea and the
Mirror. One character in this work states, “too light winning [may]
make the prize light,” and another claims,  “We are such stuff as
dreams are made on.” The opening of this play occurs after Claribel is
married to the King of Tunis. The drunkards Stephano and Trinculo
attempt to rebel in this work, and they ally with the son of (*)
Sycorax, but their plots ultimately fail, and this play sees King
Alfonso of Naples try to find his son, Ferdinand. Caliban and Ariel
appear in, for ten points, what Shakespearean play about the magician
Prospero? The {Arnolfini Wedding} (Accept {Marriage of }Giovanni{
Arnolfini}, The {Arnolfini Double Portrait}, or anything else that
suggests a marriage between Giovanni Arnolfini and his wife) In this
painting, a cherry tree is barely visible through the window, and one
fruit sits on the windowsill. Three other fruits rest on a table that
is directly above two wooden clogs in this work. A lit candle on the
brass chandelier can be visible in the upper portion of it,
symbolizing unity. In the bottom of this painting, a brown (*) dog
looks at the observer, and a convex mirror in it depicts the artist
and a priest. A large, red bed is on the right of the two main
figures, one with a hand on her belly. That figure is not actually
pregnant, and wears a long, green dress while holding hands with a man
in a fur-trimmed coat. For ten points, name this Jan van Eyck painting
depicting a marriage. {Louis XIV} of France (prompt on “Louis”; accept
“{Sun King}” before mentioned) One of this king’s generals, Marshall
Turenne, was defeated in the Battle of the Dunes, and his minister
Jean-Baptiste Colbert welcomed Venetian glass in his country. This
ruler settled his conflict with William III of Orange and the League
of Augsburg in the Treaty of Ryswick, and his Edict of (*)
Fontainbleau nullified the Edict of Nantes. This ruler failed in his
attempt to place Philip V on the throne of Spain in the War of the
Spanish Succession, and he famously claimed, “I am the state.” For ten
points, name this French king who moved his palace to Versailles and
was called the “Sun King”. Ludwig {Wittgenstein   } This thinker
examined the use of analogy using the grammatically similar sentences
“A has a gold tooth” and “A has a toothache.” This thinker was
inspired by the way traffic courts in Paris model car accidents with
toy cars to propose his “picture theory,” which was included in work
that begins “The world is all that is the case.”  This author of the
(*) Blue and Brown Books argued that “What we cannot speak of we must
pass over in silence” and refuted the possibility of a private
language using  the example of a beetle in a box. For ten points, name
this Austrian philosopher whose works include Philosophical
Investigations and Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. Rabindranath
{Tagore} This poet wrote that  “all I had achieved was carried off on”
“The Golden Boat,” which he included in his collection Sonar Tori. He
wrote about Bimala’s marriage to Nikhil and subsequent affair with
Sandip in his novel The Home and the World. He was the first non-
European Nobel Prize recipient, and he wrote Jana Gana Mana and Amar
Shona Bangla, the (*) Indian and Bangladeshi national anthems. This
man’s most famous poetry collection was introduced to the West with an
introduction by W.B. Yeats. For ten points, name this Indian poet of
“Song Offerings” in the Gitanjali. the {Netherlands} (or {Holland})
The islands of Saba and Bonaire are a part of this country, and its
highest point, Vaalserberg, lies in the Ardennes in the south. The
mouths of the Meuse and the Scheldt lie in this country, and its
cities include Tilburg and Utrecht. This country’s area has steadily
increased over the years due to use of polders in land reclamation.
This country is home to the world’s largest port, (*) Rotterdam, which
lies on the mouth of the Rhine. This country lies mostly below sea
level and is home to the Europol and the International Court of
Justice, both of which are located in The Hague. This country borders
the North Sea to the north and Germany to the east, and along with
Belgium and Luxembourg, this country forms the Low Countries. For ten
points, identify this country with capital at Amsterdam. {sword}s
According to legend, one of these objects named Heaven’s Will was
owned by the Vietnamese king Le Loi, and  another one named Joyeuse
was owned by a mythological version of Charlemagne. Roland owned one
named Durendal, and Odin broke one belonging to Sigmund when he tried
to attack him. That object, Gram, was later used by (*) Sigurd to kill
the dragon Fafnir, and Beowulf owned one of these that proved to be
ineffective against Grendel’s Mother. Besides one named Hrunting, an
item of this type was given to the Lady of the Lake and pulled out of
a stone. For ten points, name these weapons, a famous example of which
is King Arthur’s Excalibur. Ivan Sergeyevich {Turgenev} In one of this
author’s works, a young landowner named Dimitry Sanin falls in love
while visiting Frankfurt, while another of his works includes the
characters Fedya, Kostya, and Pavlusha. This author of Torrents of
Spring included Bezhin Lea in his collection Sportsman’s Sketches. In
his most famous work, (*) Anna Odinstova confesses her love for the
protagonist before kissing him on his deathbed, and the protagonist
fights with Pavel after flirting with Fenechka earlier in the work.
For ten points, name this author who wrote about Arkady Kirsanov and
his nihilist friend Bazarov in Fathers and Sons. {meiosis} (accept
“{prophase}” until “Kinetochore”) The synaptonemal complex
disassembles during the diplotene stage of this process, and its
pachytene stage sees the formation of chiasmata. Kinetochore
microtubules help in separating homologous chromosomes and in pulling
them towards opposite poles of the cell during this process. This
process sometimes results in the formation of an (*) oocyte and three
polar bodies, and one cycle of this process can produce four sperm.
This process produces haploid gametes each with half the genetic
content of the parental cell. For ten points, name process required
for sexual reproduction which is often contrasted with mitosis. Battle
of the {Little Bighorn} (accept Battle of the {Greasy Grass} before
read; prompt on “Custer’s Last Stand”) Thomas McDougald was assigned
to obtain extra provisions prior to this conflict, while the Battle of
the Rosebud prevented General Crook’s troops from fighting at this
battle. Also known as the Battle of the Greasy Grass, American troops
were nearly wiped out at Reno Hill during this conflict until
Frederick Benteen’s reinforcements arrived. Controversial accounts of
this battle were given by Curley and Chief Gall, while (*) Buffalo
Calf Road Woman is credited for striking a fatal blow to the American
commander, whose plan to divide his army was futile against a larger
group led by Sitting Bull. For ten points, identify this 1876 battle
near its namesake river in which a group of Plains Indians defeated
the US Army led by George Armstrong Custer. {Ho Chi Minh} (or {Nguyen
Sinh Cung}; or {Nguyen Ai Quoc}) After the August Revolution, this man
became Chairman of the Provisional Government. As a chef in France, he
approached U.S. President Woodrow Wilson at the Versailles Peace
Conference, asking for help to remove the French from his home
country, but was rejected. In 1954, his generals won a 54-day siege on
the stronghold of (*) Dien Bien Phu, and he led the Viet Minh
Indepedence Movement from 1941 onwards. His namesake trail was used by
the Vietcong to launch the Tet Offensive. For ten points, name this
Vietnamese Communist revolutionary leader and founder of North
Vietnam. Nadine {Gordimer} In one of this author’s works, a black
worker named Jacobus tells Mehring of a dead black man on his farm. In
another work, one character exclaims “I’m not your Bassie” after being
frustrated that Lionel’s daughter Rosa does not know his real name.
The most famous work by this author of The (*) Conservationist sees
the title character and Daniel ride a bakkie and a character kill two
warthogs. In that work of hers, Maureen and Bam Smales grant freedom
to the title character after a Black Revolution. For ten points, name
this South African author of Burger’s Daughter and July’s People.
{Boyle}-Mariotte law (prompt on {ideal gas} law) This statement was
used by Newton and Laplace to derive the speed of sound, and a McLeod
gauge applies this law, although it was first discovered using a
manometer designed by Robert Hooke. Daniel Bernoulli used Newton’s
laws of motion to derive this statement, which he explained using his
kinetic theory of gases. Also named for  (*) Mariotte, this law
explains why ears pop at high altitudes, and is featured in the
combined gas law with Charles’s law and Gay-Lussac’s law. For ten
points, identify this gas law that states for constant temperature,
pressure and volume are inversely related. Richard {Nixon} After he
lost a gubernatorial election to Pat Brown, this man told reporters
they wouldn’t have him to “kick around anymore.”  His presidency saw
the establishment of the Environmental Protection Agency, and he was
elevated to national prominence by his role in the Alger Hiss case.
His Secretary of State (*) Henry Kissinger initiated Détente (day-
TAHNT) and he signed the Anti-Ballistic Missile and first SALT
treaties with the Soviet Union. His visit to the People’s Republic of
China opened diplomatic relations between it and the United States.
For ten points, name this 37th President of the United States who
resigned in the wake of the Watergate Scandal. {Prometheus} The blood
of this deity created a plant that could be turned into an ointment
that gave its wearer invincibility. This son of Iapetus prophesized
that Io would become an ancestor of Hercules, and instructed his son
Deucalion to hide in a chest in order to survive a flood. This Titan
warned Zeus that Thetis would produce a son greater than his father,
and a dying (*) Chiron offered to take his place after Hercules freed
him from his bonds. This figure is said to have been left with only
clay to use for his creations after his brother used all the good
traits for his own.  For ten points, name this Titan, the brother of
Epimetheus whom Zeus bound to a rock for giving humanity fire.
Hieronymous {Bosch} In one of this man’s paintings, rebel angels are
thrown out and Eve is chased out into the dark forest, and Jesus
emerges from a bright cloud. In addition to his The Last Judgement, he
painted a work in which a nun attempts to balance a red book on her
head on the right, and a man in pink pokes at another figure’s skull,
The (*) Cure of Folly. In this man’s most famous work, an abnormally
large strawberry is visible, and people are crucified on musical
instruments on the right, while Adam and Even appear in the Garden of
Eden on the left. For ten points, name this artist who painted the
triptych The Garden of Earthly Delights. Carlos Ray “Chuck” {Norris}
(prompt on {Walker, Texas Ranger}) Conan O’Brien used to utilize a
lever that displayed video clips of this man when pulled, and in one
TV show, he marries Alex Cahill and works with Jimmy Trivette. One
commercial claims that this man is a hunter, but he does not hunt,
because hunting implies the possibility of failure, and that there are
ten million players in the World of Warcraft because he (*) allows
them to live. When you and this man both have five dollars, he has
more money than you, and he has counted to infinity twice and can
divide by zero. For ten points, name this man to whom impossible feats
are ascribed in an internet meme, the roundhouse-kick-delivering
former star of Walker, Texas Ranger. {Brownian} Motion This process
follows the Langevin equation, which can be evaluated using the
Fokker-Planck equation. A thought experiment proposed by Marian
Smoluchowski could extract energy from this process, but Richard
Feynman shot down that idea by noting that this process would also
apply to the pawl. This process roughly approaches the (*) Wiener
process, like random walks, and Einstein’s model of this process can
be used to derive Avogadro’s number. The namesake of a hypothetical
ratchet is, for ten points, what phenomenon in which particles in a
fluid move randomly, named after the Scottish biologist who first
observed it with grains of pollen suspended in water? John {Milton}
This author dispels the “vain deluding joys” before describing the
“pleasures Melancholy give”, which the author “choose[s] to live” with
in one work. In another work, the title character admits to God that
he does not own his power, and lost it with a wanting for Dalila. This
author demands “the liberty ... to argue freely according to
conscience” in a work that argues against (*) censorship. This author
of Il Penseroso, Samson Agonistes, and Areopagitica is most famous for
a work in which Mulciber is directed to build the Pandemonium, and the
main character states, “Better to reign in Hell than to serve in
Heaven.” For ten points, name this blind British author of Paradise
Lost. {zero} (or {additive identity} before mention) The kernel of a
linear transformation T is the set of all vectors v such that T sends
v to this value. This many odd perfect numbers have currently been
discovered, and it is the value of the determinant of a singular
matrix. This is the probability of two mutually exclusive events
occurring. This number is its own (*) additive inverse, but it has no
multiplicative inverse, because it is impossible to divide by this
number. This number is contained in the set of whole numbers but not
in the set of natural numbers. For ten points, what is this neither
positive nor negative number which is equal to four minus four?
{Darius} the Great (or {Darius} I) This ruler introduced the daric
coin, and he rose to power with help from Gobrayes and Intaphernes.
His murder of Gaumata was recorded in the Behistum Inscription, and
this victor against the Scythians claimed the throne after the death
of Cambyses II. He divided his empire into twenty strictly defined (*)
satraps, and he suppressed the Ionian Revolt in 499 B.C.E. He began
construction projects at his capitals of Susa and Persepolis.
Miltiades defeated this man’s general, Datis, during the first Persian
Invasion in Greece. For ten points, name this father of Xerxes I, who
led the Persian Empire at its peak. Thornton Niven {Wilder} In one
work by this author, Northeastern America faces extinction due to an
advancing wall of ice, while in another work, a Franciscan monk
witnesses the collapse of the title structure created by the Incans.
This author who wrote about the Antrobus family in The (*) Skin of Our
Teeth is perhaps most famous for writing a play which is narrated by
the Stage Manager and takes place in Grover’s Corners. For ten points,
name this American author who wrote about Brother Juniper in The
Bridge of San Luis Ray and about George Gibbs and Emily Webb in Our
Town. {Occupy} Wall Street (or {Occupy} Movement or{ OWS}) Some people
involved in this event met in the lobby of Deutsche Bank, and the
Adbusters started this event with a hashtag urging people to get
involved before having enough people to do the human microphone. They
have been endorsed by Julian Assange and Ben & Jerry’s, and the group
Anonymous told their readers to join this group and set up kitchens
and peaceful (*) barricades. Anthony Bologna pepper sprayed some of
their peaceful protesters back in October, and on November 15th they
were forcibly evicted from their encampment in Zuccotti Park in New
York City. For ten points, name this activist group that claims “we
are the 99%.” Battle of {Verdun} During this battle, Charles Mangin
made a failed attempt to reoccupy Fort Vaux and Fort Douaumont. The
Voie Sacrée, or Sacred Way, served as a supply line for one side
during the battle, and the other side in this battle was led by Erich
von Falkenhayn. During this battle, Robert Nivelle proclaimed that
“they shall not pass.” The leader of the victorious side in this
battle became a national hero and went on to head (*) Vichy France.
For ten points, identify this bloody World War I battle which resulted
in the promotion of Philippe Petain and was fought from February to
December 1916 in northeastern France. Maximilian Carl Emil {Weber}
This man described world-flying mysticism as one of the three ideal
types of religious activity in Economy and Society, and included
wealth, prestige, and power in his three-component theory of
stratification. This thinker claimed that political authority could be
legitimized by law, tradition, or charisma and also defined the
“state” as a (*) “monopoly on the legitimate use of physical force.”
This author of Politics as a Vocation described the “iron cage of
rationality” and criticized the excessive power of the bureaucracy in
the social order. He also argued that Calvinism influenced the
development of market economies. For ten points, name this German
sociologist who wrote The Protestant Ethic and The Spirit of
Capitalism? {Jurassic} period The Morrison formation is composed of
sedimentary rock from this period, which is named for a mountain range
on the Swiss-French border. The Nevadan Orogeny occurred during this
period, and coralline algae first appeared during this time. The
Tethys Sea was formed during this period when Pangaea (*) divided into
Laurasia and Gondwana, and its Tithonian stage preceded the Cretaceous
period. This period saw the evolution of flying birds, like the
archeopteryx [ar - kee - OP - ter - iks], as well as sauropods such as
the apatosaurus and the brachiosaurus. For ten points, identify this
period of the Mesozoic era following the Triassic which is known for
the proliferation of dinosaurs. {cartilage} Protrusions of this
substance in the spine are called Schmorl’s nodes, and Tietze syndrome
occurs when this is inflammed. Its fibro type can be found in
symphyses, while the pinna is composed of its elastic type. The
hyaline type of this substance is covered by the perichondrium. (*)
Intervertebral discs are made of this substance, which heals slowly
due to its lack of blood vessels. Chondrocytes are cells found in this
substance, and during endochondral ossification, it is replaced with
bone.  Patients with osteoarthritis have a loss of this substance,
which normally helps lubricate joints. For ten points, name this
connective tissue which makes up the human nose and ear. {New Zealand}
This country’s Mount Rapehu serves as the source of the Waikato River,
which drains into Lake Taupo. This country is home to the Fox and
Franz Josef Glaciers, and it controls the Chatham Islands, Tokelau,
and Stewart Island. This country’s Antipodes Islands are notable for
lying near the opposite side of the earth from London, and its (*)
Canterbury Plains are located south of Christchurch. This country’s
highest point, Aoraki, lies in its Southern Alps, and it borders the
Tasman Sea to the northwest. Its two parts are separated by the Cook
Strait and are known as North and South Island. For ten points, name
this Pacific Island country with largest city at Auckland and a
capital of Wellington. George {Gershwin} This composer’s one-act
opera, Blue Monday, was renamed 135th Street, and he included part of
his “Novelette in Fourths” in his Short Story for violin and piano.
Another of his works, which includes parts for maracas, gourd, and
bongo, was originally titled Rumba and was inspired by a trip to
Havana. This composer used (*) taxi horns in his orchestration of a
ballet portraying the French capital in the 1920s, and was also
inspired by a train journey to Boston to compose the penultimate piece
of a concert titled “An Experiment in Modern Music.” That work by this
composer of Cuban Overture and An American in Paris begins with a
famous clarinet trill and glissando. For ten points, name this
American composer of Rhapsody in Blue. Kingdom of {Cambodia} (accept
{Kampuchea}) One empire in this country was preceded by the Chenla
Kingdom, and was later succeeded by Longvek after it was conquered by
Thailand’s Ayutthaya. Jayavarman and Suryavarman were ancient rulers
of this country, which was occupied by UNTAC peacekeepers in the early
1990’s. This country’s ruler Norodom Sihanouk was overthrown in a 1970
coup by Brother Number 2, (*) Lon Nol. This country, which was invaded
by ARVN and US forces during the Vietnam War, is home to Angkor Wat
and was once ruled by an organization led by Pol Pot. For ten points,
identify this Southeast Asian country once home to the Khmer Rouge,
with capital at Phnom Penh. Honoré de {Balzac} This author wrote a
work in which Valere Marneffe works with the title character to
torment Adeline’s husband Baron Hector Hulot, and also another work in
which Felix refuses to repair his worn-down house and des Grassins
desires his son Adolphe to marry the title character. In addition to
Cousin Bette and (*) Eugenie Grandet, this author wrote a story in
which Raphael Volentin owns the title object which shrinks whenever it
grants him a wish. He also authored a story in which Eugene de
Rastignac becomes friends with the title character. For ten points,
name this French author who included The Wild Ass’s Skin and Pere
Goriot in his collection, The Human Comedy. {Sikh}ism In this
religion, the last step a devotee needs to perform to reach a union
with God is known as Sach Khand. Practitioners of this religion engage
in meditation called simran. One of the leaders of this religion
emphasized that metal bracelets and curved swords are two of the five
key requisites for an ideal devotee. Gobind created the five (*) “K”s
for the Khalsa branch of this religion. Devotees often travel to the
Golden Temple in Amritsar to pay their respects. For ten points, name
this Indian religion, practiced mainly by Punjabis and founded by Guru
Nanak. {Ramesses II} (accept {Ramesses the Great} or {Ozymandias}
before mention; prompt on “Ramesses”) This ruler celebrated 14 sed
festivals during his lengthy reign, and inscriptions at Gerf Hussein
commemorate his conquest of Nubia. He defeated the Sherden pirates and
built his capital on the remains of the city of Avaris. This husband
of Nefertari and successor to Seti I signed the known first peace
treaty in history. This ruler’s many sons were buried at KV5, and this
ruler built memorials to himself at (*) Karnak and Abu Simbel to
commemorate his victory at the largest chariot battle ever fought. For
ten points, name this New Kingdom Egyptian pharaoh, who was sometimes
known as Ozymandias and who fought the Hittites at the Battle of
Kadesh. The {Regal Beagle} It’s significance is discussed in a skit
preceding the track ‘Child’s Play” on the Ghostface Killah album
Supreme Clientele. Employees here include Jim, played by Paul Ainsley,
and Mike, portrayed by Brad Blaisdell. Frank, a cruel older bartender
puts up a naked picture of the protagonist on this establishment’s
wall. In “Dates of Wrath” Bob catches the eye of [*] Janet but takes
out Terry instead. The low cut shirts on the waitresses often caught
the eye of Larry Dallas and his friends Jack Tripper and his two
housemate, FTP name this establishment, the swinging bar on Three’s
Company. {Hesperides} It discusses Susana Southwell’s feet, while
other dedicatees of its contents include Prudence, Dianeme, and
Endymion Porter. Its author notes that he will sing of “groves and
twilights,” “The Court of Mab,” [*] and “the Fairy King” in the
indexical opening “The Argument of His Book.” But more meditative fare
such as “The White Island” and “His Litany to the Holy Spirit” were
added when it was amended with the addition of His Noble Numbers, yet
the overwhelming mood of its original constituents like “To Daisies,”
“The Hock Cart,” and the “Julia” poems is celebratory. FTP identify
this book of poetry best known for the carpe diem attitude expressed
of the works “Corinna’s Going a Maying” and “To the Virgins to Make
Much of Time,” the masterpiece of Robert Herrick. {Giambologna} He
produced a series of bronze reliefs for the Genoa University Chapel,
but all of his marble works, save Samson Slaying the Philistine, are
now found in what became his adopted home. Although he lost a
competition to design a fountain of Neptune for the Piazza Signoria to
Bartolomeo Ammanati, he ended up winning the commission to depict his
patron, Cosimo I, on horseback [*] in the same square. His other works
include a small Apollo, the dynamic Hercules and the Centaur, and the
weightless looking bronze Mercury. His most famous work, based on
Michelangelo’s Victory, was designed so that the spectator must walk
all the way around to see its three intertwined figures. FTP identify
this sculptor of The Abduction of the Sabine Woman, commonly known by
the Italianate version of his name Jean de Boulogne. {Beer}’s Law It
has been found that the propagation of a Gaussian laser beam in
methane does not obey it. Aqueous solutions of dyes also deviate from
it because of the formation of aggregates and dimers. (*) If it is
true for a given solution, the plot of log I-sub-zero over I will be a
straight line whose slope is equal to the molar extinction
coefficient. FTP, name this law which states that the amount of light
absorbed by a solute dissolved in a non- absorbing solvent is
proportional to the path length of the light through the solution and
the concentration of the solute. {Oneida} Standard activities included
the weekly “bag bees,” croquet, and concerts by its two full
orchestras. Although its own newsletter, The Circular, was always
upbeat, certain arrangements failed—like when Sewall Newhouse got so
jealous that he was put in solo-confinement, or when William Mills was
left in a snow drift for introducing twelve year olds to night time
activities at the Manor home [*]. Some of its most influential leaders
were women, such as Mary Cragin and Harriet Skinner, and its founder
published his ideas on “complex marriage’ and God in works like The
Witness and Scientific Propagation. Originally based on the idea of
humanity’s slow but sure development into perfection, eventually the
founder’s son, Pierrepoint, made its name famous for the production of
silverware, FTP, identify this community of “Bible Communists” who
were founded by John Humphry Noyes. {Nectar in a Sieve} The
protagonist’s husband in blackmailed into thinking he fathered two
illegitimate children and a severe drought forces her to sell her best
clothes to Biswas. The dried-up mango wreath symbolizes the hard times
that are to come in this novel, which contrasts Kali’s largeness and
outspoken demeanor with the frail physique of the homeless Janaki.
Even though the protagonist’s literacy (*) allows her to feel superior
to these two women, she finds herself at the mercy of the bill-
collector Sivaji early on. Later, she must won over the scheming
Kunthi, but much of the novel focuses the protagonist’s search of her
missing son Murugan which forces her to become a temple beggar. The
novel ends with the death of her husband Nathan and a return to the
village with the leper boy Puli. FTP, name this work about the
struggles of the Indian peasant woman Rukmani, the best-known work of
Kamala Markandaya. Prince {Henry the Navigator} His advisors included
Johan Cresques and the biographer Zurara. The Battle of Alfarrobeira
was the high point for strife in his family. This era was precipitated
by the death of his brother Duarte and the desire of Leonor of Aragon
not to allow his other brother Pedro [*] to ascend the throne,
ultimately this grand master of the Order of Christ had to take sides
and chose King Alfonso. He had first made his name with the capture of
Ceuta, but he suffered a great defeat at Tangiers. He was best known,
however, for sponsoring the ventures of men like Gil Eanes and Joa
Zarco in Asia and Africa, FTP, name this man whose mint in Lisbon
produced the “cruzado” coin and who established a colony for
exploration at Sagres. {Variations on a Theme of Pagnini} (as long as
they say Paganini accept equivalents that display clear knowledge)
Boris Blacher composed an orchestral piece with this name, while a
setting for two pianos was written in Nazi occupied Warsaw by Witold
Lutoslawski. Two sets of studies for piano, numbering twenty-eight in
all, were finished in 1863 by Johannes Brahms who chose to work with
the same original piece, the twenty-fourth in A minor, [*] that was
used in their most notable interpretation. That 1934 version includes
a cavalry charge, a minuet, and incorporated the Dies Irae in
counterpoint as a tribute to their namesake composer, a man whose
works like The Witches’ Dance and Fantasia on a G String were said to
have been composed after a reputed deal with the devil. FTP identify
the name of these compositions, which were inspired by an Italian
virtuoso’s famous Caprices, the most famous of which is a Rhapsody by
Rachmaninov. {Petition of Right} It began by appealing to the Statutum
de Tallagio non Concedendo, and protesting the issuance of forced
loans, tallages, or benevolences. Section IX criticized the arbitrary
refusal of local officials and judges to prosecute “sundry grievous
offenders,” while Section VI protested the forced [*] quartering of
“great companies of soldiers and mariners.” Chosen in favor of a more
moderate appeal advocated by Thomas Wentworth, it was heavily directed
at the undue influence of George Villiers over the Court and the Privy
Council and was drafted and submitted by Edward Coke. FTP, name this
1628 document that outlined the abuses of Charles I. {Phenomenology of
Perception} Its first main division ends by reflecting on the
subject’s role as “object” and uses the example of a phantom limb to
argue for the creation of a human being through the deployment of
“expression and speech.” The last section echoes Being and Nothingness
[*] and argues that even obstacles to our freedom are in reality
deployed by it. Beginning with the chapter “Traditional Prejudices and
the Return to Phenomena,” its ideas were later amended in the author’s
posthumous The Visible and the Invisible, while its discussion of
sensation is an expansion of the arguments proffered in the earlier
The Structure of Behavior. FTP identify this 1945 work that sought to
meld the ideas of Sartre with those of Husserl a work by Maurice
Merleau-Ponty. {sclerenchyma} The Citrus Tristeza virus causes it to
deteriorate in the Mexican Lime, and its secondary walls are based on
n ordered, layered scaffolding of cellulose microfibrils. It always
elongates via intrusive growth, (*) remaining attached to the walls of
the cells between which it grows. “Bast” or phloem fibers are often
made of it, as are intraxalry wood fibers. Unlike collenchyma, it has
a lignified secondary cell wall, and it is the main component of both
thorns and seed coverings. FTP, name this plant tissue which provides
tensile and shear strength, which has a name that literally means
“hardened tissue.” {Love is Not Enough} It was originally published
alongside fifteen photos taken by Myron H. Davis and includes parts
like “The World Outside,” which discusses the importance of weekly
trips to the swimming pool, as well as the chapter “Food: The Great
Socializer,” that focuses on the impact regularly scheduled meals can
have on abnormal behavior. The story of Stuart, whose father always
lets him win during their wrestling matches, allows its author to
illustrate the dangers of over-indulging and being “too safe.” [*] In
its preface the author thanks his collaborator at the school, Dr. Emmy
Sylvester, and this study ends with an appeal to transfer the
knowledge gleaned from observing the deviant behaviors presented and
to adapt the lessons learned to everyday interactions with young
persons in normal schools. FTP, identify this work, subtitled “The
Treatment of Emotionally Disturbed Children,” whose title asserts that
parents have to do more than just care deeply for their kids, a work
by Bruno Bettelheim. {Travesties} One character in this work recites a
limerick that ends “and yet, and yet, and yet” after asking other
characters for a loan. That same character later parodies the ballad
of Mr. Dooley after another proclaims: “art for art’s sake—I
defecate.” At one point, the librarian Cecily (*) and the secretary
Gwendolen parody the song “Mr. Gallagher and Mr. Shean.” These two
characters are based on characters from The Importance of Being
Earnest, a play being put on by James Joyce in this work. The artist
Tristan Tzara creates poetry by pulling words out of a hat, while
Nadya Krupskaya and Vlad Lenin learn of the revolution taking place in
St. Petersburg. The butler Bennett speaks his piece about the news to
his master Henry Carr in, FTP, what play which takes place in the
Zurich library, a work by Tom Stoppard? {hydrofluouric acid} (accept
{HF}) It is used in the preparation of betamethasone, a treatment for
inflammatory disorders. The Phillips process and UOP use it as a
catalyst to alkylate low-weight olefines with isobutene. (*) Its
ability to dissolve oxides makes it, like sulfuric acid, key to
electropolishing molybdenum, niobium, tantalum, and tungsten. It is
often distilled from a mixture of calcium sulfate after sulfuric acid
reacts with the mineral fluorspar. FTP, name this acid which is
classified as weak despite its reactive nature, and consists of a
hydrogen atom and an atom of the most electronegative halogen.
{Rastafarian} The Israeli adherents have ties to the Tewahedo church,
and the Nyahbinghi sect preach the ideal of a global theocracy. The
first member to run for office was Sam Brown who formed the Suffering
People’s Party. They see every person as the embodiment of the Holy
Spirit. Their primary texts include the book by Robert Athlyi Rogers,
the [*] Holy Piby and they also revere the Kebra Negast which tells
the story of King Solomon and the Queen of Sheba’s lineage. Popular
culture influences include there use of nonce terms such as
“downpression” and Nas’s favorite “overstand”. They also understand
the teachings of Marcus Garvey as religious prophecy. FTP name this
religion often associated with ganja, dreadlocks, and shiftless
college students. {Humbaba} He can hear “the heifer when it stirs at
sixty leagues distance” and he has created an enchanted gate that must
be passed when someone enters his kingdom, an area that stretches for
ten thousand leagues in every direction. Before he is encountered, his
adversary sacrifices a white kid and receives the “Axe of Heroes” and
the “Bow of Anshan.” [*] Sometimes referred to as “the great
Herdsman,” he cries out for the first time after a sacred cedar has
been felled. He wields the seven splendors and other weapons include a
deadly nod, a fiery breath, and a look that turns men to stone. But
all of this is for naught when the winds of Shamash are invoked and
destroy him, at which point Enkidu and his companion kill this
guardian of Enlil’s forest. FTP identify this giant who is killed by
Gilgamesh during his adventures. {Kronecker Delta} function [prompt on
“Kronecker” or “Delta”] Along with a positive integer’s Möbius
function, it is used extensively in a combinatorial proof of Chen’s
inversion theorem. The Levi-Civita permutation symbol is a specialized
case (*) of its generalized version, and the base vectors of an
orthogonal linear space can be described by its application. The only
isotropic tensor of rank-2, an n by n identity matrix can be written
in terms of it when the matrix’s row and column numbers are
represented by its two variables, i and j. FTP, what is this function
named for a Polish-born mathematician, which is 1 when both of its
variables are equal and 0 otherwise, the discrete analog of a similar
“function” named for Dirac? {Yalu} River The name common for it
worldwide comes from words meaning “greenish blue duck”. Rising on
Baitou Mountain in the Changbai mountain range, its chief tributaries
are the Changjin, Herchun, and Tokro rivers. Now bordering the
provinces [*] of Kirin and Liaoning, this river first became a
political demarcator during the Koryo dynasty in the 14th century. The
largest city on this river is Dandong and it flows only for 491 miles
before emptying into the Yellow Sea. FTP give the name of this river
known chiefly for separating Manchuria from the Korean peninsula.
{Aeschines} Rumors spread about this man included that he had assisted
his mother at bizarre nocturnal religious rituals and served as a
janitor in his father's schoolhouse. His first political activity was
as a supporter of Eubulus [YOO-buh-luhss], and he scored a major
success by accusing Timarchus of having worked as a [*] male
prostitute. He died in exile in Rhodes after having accused Ctesiphon
of making an illegal proposal in the assembly, which caused this man's
main political opponent to make the speech known as On the Crown. FTP,
name this Athenian orator who was also the target of the oration On
the False Assembly, given by his most prominent enemy, Demosthenes.
(Clarence) Malcolm {Lowry} The reformed Sigbjorn Wilderness is the
protagonist of his posthumously published novel Dark as the Grave
Wherein My Friend is Laid. He had planned to organize his writings
under the title “The Voyage that Never Ends,” and he managed to write
“The Forest Path to the Spring” and “Through the Panama Canal” [*] for
his collection of short stories Hear Us O Lord from Heaven Thy
Dwelling Place. The novella Lunar Caustic is based on his experiences
sobering up at Bellevue Hospital, and it is hard to deny that the main
characters of his most famous novel, Yvonne Constable and the
alcoholic Geoffrey Firmin who encounter each other on the Day of the
Dead, are based partly on his ex-wife and him FTP, name this author
whose novel Ultramarine is seen as a preface to his most famous work,
Under the Volcano. Seamus {Heaney} He clarifies the distinction
between “technique and craft” during his discussion of “The Diviner”
in the critical essay “Feeling Into Words.” He describes a
conversation as a “loose single gown” in “A Dream of Jealousy” and he
ruminates on a critter “snuffing the boards five feet beyond me” in
“The Skunk.” His other poems include “Chasing and Gathering” dedicated
to Ted Hughes and a retelling of Philoctetes in The Cure at Troy [*]
The essay collection The Government of the Tongue discusses the
politics of English in his homeland. More representative works include
the archeological “Tollund’s Man,” a piece on a body discovered in a
peat bog, “Punishment,” and sequence of dream encounters set on St.
Patrick’s Purgatory. Recently he has done a new translation of
Beowulf. FTP, identify the author of volumes of verse like Station
Island, Field Work, and The Death of the a Naturalist. {Luddite}
Revolts or Uprising or equivalent Partially spurred on by the
execution of Thomas Hellliker, many of the participants dressed in
drag to avoid capture and carried with them “Great Enochs.” Writing
letters under pseudonyms like Peter Plush, their actions, which
historians now argue were planned by men like George Mellor and
Graevnor Hansen, escalated and brought about the passing of the Watch
and Ward Act. [*] The death of Mr. Horsfall turned some public figures
against the cause, which especially targeted Richard Arkwright’s
innovations. A violent encounter between their perpetrators and
Richard Cartwright was vividly retold in Charlotte Bronte’s Shirley.
Beginning in and around Nottingham, where many weavers made their
homes, FTP, identify these happenings in England that saw their
namesake participants destroying machinery. The {Principles of
Psychology} The penultimate section discusses the research of Gurney
and Charcot on hypnotism, while its other chapters introduce “The
Principle of Mediate Comparison” and “The Transitoriness of
Instincts.” The book begins with a consideration of its own “scope”
and argues that Romeo’s pursuit of Juliet illustrates the mind’s
capacity [*] to attain an end by varying means. Its more famous
discussions include a rumination on “The Law of Contrast” in the
section on sensation, the dismissal of the “automaton theory” in favor
of common sense, and the refutation of Lange’s ideas about the
causality of emotion, which the author argues are wrong because our
mind actually follows our body. FTP identify this treatise which
describes “thought and experience” as “remolding at every moment” like
a stream, a work by William James. Leos {Janacek} His works for piano
include the song cycle On an Overgrown Path and the sonata From the
Street, whereas his six cantatas were given religious names such as
Lord, Have Mercy Upon Us and The Eternal Gospel. His final years were
spent infatuated with the married Kamila [*]Stosslova who became the
inspiration for works like Diary of One Who Walks Alone and his second
String Quartet, Intimate Letters, although the first quartet was based
on Tolstoy, and is known as the Kreutzer Sonata. Other pieces with
literary origins include a Rhapsody on Taras Bulba and Kata Kabanova
based on Ostrovsky, while his use of native Moravian folk songs is
seen in the lively Sinfonietta and in parts of his Glagolithic Mass.
Best known for an opera about an anthropomorphized fox, FTP, identify
this Czech composer of Jenufa and The Cunning Little Vixen. Treaty of
{Ryswick} This agreement effectively aimed to restore the status quo
under the Treaties of Nijmegen, which had been signed nearly two
decades earlier. Courtrai, Mons, and Luxembourg were all returned to
Spain [*], as was Catalonia. The acquisitions of Pondicherry, Nova
Scotia, and Saint-Dominique offset the cessions of France, who had to
give possession of Lorraine to Leopold Joseph. A formal protest to
this treaty was personally written by James II, who objected to its
provision that Louis IV formally recognize William III as king of
England. FTP, name this treaty that ended the War of the League of
Augsburg. {Malpighian tubule}s Their distal regions can fuse with the
rectum epithelium, and their lumens have a low pH, causing certain
acids to precipitate. The highly hydrophobic brochosomes are created
in the golgi apparati of these organs [*] in some organisms, though in
others they produce silk. The adjective “cryptonephridic” describes
them when they are independently attached to the hindgut as opposed to
being free, and they are more highly evolved structures than analogous
coxal glands found in land crabs and ticks. Aphids lack, FTP, what
site of uric acid production and hemolymph filtration, the main
osmoregulatory and excretory organs of insects? {Quad Cities} Sharing
its name with the production team comprised of C.C. Lemonhead and Jay
Ski, this area’s adjoining cities are Silvis, Milan, Coal Valley, and
Colona and some of the counties that make up the area are Scott, Henry
and Mercer counties. [*] One member was home of Ft. Armstrong, the
headquarters of operations for the Black Hawk War and the Chicago
Cubs’ AAA team is located in another member. Bettendorf has all but
replaced the last of the group to join and the industrial growth of
the area was spurred by John Deere opening a factory in Moline. FTP
name this group of cities comprised of Moline, East Moline, Rock
Island, and Davenport with a numeric moniker. Charles {Wilkes} His
scientific works include Theory of the Winds and Narrative
Meteorology. The early part of his career was spent surveying routes
to the Pacific as head of the Navy’s Department of Charts and
Instruments. His 1849 work Voyage Around the World discusses his
claims of discovering a continent, yet he is better known for
stumbling upon and then arresting two Confederate [*] commissioners in
the Bahama Channel. Although part of Antarctica bears his name it is
his captaining of the San Jacinto and his interactions with Messrs.
James Mason and John Slidell for which he is remembered. FTP identify
this explorer and soldier who caused an international affair by
seizing the British steamer Trent. {The Makioka Sisters} Divided into
three parts, the second features a terrible flood, while the last
section sees the emigration of the neighboring Stolz family, who
return to Nazi Germany. Originally published under the title “Delicate
Snow,” minor characters include Aunt Tominaga and O-Haru, the lazy
maid. [*] The third oldest of the protagonists bears a blemish over
her left eye and dabbles in French and Western music, while the
youngest has affairs with commoners like Itakura, as she waits for
“Okubata” to propose marriage to her. Much of the novel is dominated
by Sachiko who is having trouble giving her husband a son, but dearly
loves her daughter Etsuko. FTP identify this work by Junichiro
Tanizaki, named for the four siblings at the center of its plot.
{Rosary} The one used by Muslims invokes the 100 most beautiful names
of God. In the east it was used in the recitation of the Prayer of the
Heart. The Anglican version is broken up into [*] weeks and the first
Christian versions were adopted in the 3rd century. The most common
version has its origin associated with St. Dominic and it was first
recognized officially by Pope Leo X. Recently the luminous mysteries
were added to the triumvirate of the joyful sorrowful, and glorious
mysteries by the Vatican. The Christian form is considered by scholars
to be a form of mediation through repetition this is FTP what
religious exercise in which prayers are recite and counted on string
of beads. {clip}ping The Weiler-Atherton algorithm performs it for
polygons without leaving any inappropriate connections between
different parts of filled concave polygons, as the Sutherland-Hodgman
algorithm does. The Liang-Barsky, Nichol-Lee-Nicholl, Cyrus-Beck (*),
and Cohen-Sutherland algorithms all perform this task for lines.
Important because rendering components that will never be seen wastes
CPU cycles, some algorithms for it use parametric equations to
determine when a line will go out of view. FTP, name this process
which prevents a computer from trying to draw graphics primitives that
appear outside a namesake rectangle, which, when disabled in the Doom
series of video games, allowed the player to walk through walls.
{Principia Ethica} Alan White claims that its author confused meaning
with naming, and that his most important concept has been arrogated to
the status of a property. Its author calls attention to the “principle
of organic unities” and it ends by promoting the “aesthetic
contemplation.” It opens by drawing an analogy between a key concept
and the term “yellow” [*] and argues that “a naturalistic fallacy”
undermines the work of other thinkers who confuse desire with all of
the things that are desirable. This work argues that philosophy should
be primarily concerned with two questions: “What kinds of things ought
to exist for their own sakes” and “What kind of actions ought we to
perform.” FTP identify this 1903 work that asks “What is good?,”
written by G.E. Moore. {Essays of Elia} A discussion of the Religio
Medici in light of the narrator’s prejudices against Scotsmen occurs
in “Imperfect Sympathies,” Joseph Paice’s unsuccessful wooing of Susan
Winstanley is the subject of “Modern Gallantry,” while a reason for
insomnia is explored in “Witches and Other Night Fears.” [*] A
solitary trip to the library is interrupted by the ghosts of the past
in “Oxford in the Vacation,” while the innocence of youth is reflected
on in “Dreamchildren.” Composed in three separate volumes over a
period of twelve years, the most popular examples insisted on their
namesake’s wry sense of humor, as in two separate pieces on the state
of “beggary” in London and one written in praise of “Chimney Sweeps.”
FTP identify these prose works, that included “Dissertation on Roast
Pig,” were written by Charles Lamb. {Pelops} His daughters Lysidice,
Astyadamia, and Nicippe, were married off to the sons of Perseus,
while his less well-known sons included Alcathous, Pittheus, and
Sciron. But his most famous boys were those who turned on and killed
their bastard half-brother, Chrysippus, [*] after their mother, a
former princess of Pisa grew jealous. She had been won by this hero
after he replaced the lynchpins of her father, Oenomaus’ chariot with
wax, waited for him to fall off, and then stabbed him to death. Yet
after he took Hippodamia for himself he betrayed and killed his co-
conspirator Myrtilus, who then cursed his family. The progenitor of
the House of Atreus, FTP, identify this mythological figure who was
forever reminded of Demeter’s careless hunger with the ivory shoulder
he received after his own father, Tanatalus, tried to serve him to the
Gods. {La Danse} or {The Dance} It was commissioned by Sergei Schukin,
who later told the artist: “I have decided to defy bourgeois opinion
and hang a work with nudes above my staircase.” At some points the
white of the canvas shows through, a consequence of the artist varying
the thickness of the colors as he applied them. The green ground
slopes out towards the blue sky and the figure on the bottom reaches
out to grasp [*] the hand of the woman on her left and complete the
circle. Completed in 1910, this work elaborated on a scene taken from
the background of the artist’s earlier work, The Joy of Life. FTP
identify this painting, inspired by the fast tempo of a farandole its
creator saw performed at the Moulin de la Galette, a work by Henri
Matisse. {anthracene} (or {paranaphthalene}) The Elbs reaction forms
derivative of it by cyclization and dehydration of methyl-containing
diaryl ketone compounds. One derivative of it undergoes Suzuki
coupling with 4-trifluoromethylphenylboronic acid to form an organic
semiconductor, and it can be reacted with maleic anhydrite in the
Diels-Alder [*] reaction to form a colorless adduct. Discovered in
1832 by Auguste Laurent, it is often used to create synthetic pigments
such as alizarin, and it has five available positions for
ferromagnetic coupling, one more than naphthalene. FTP, name this
crystalline aromatic hydrocarbon that is obtained from the
distillation of coal tar, has chemical formula C14H10, and consists of
three fused benzene rings. {Cancer Ward} (or {Rakovy korpus}) One
character in this novel visits a zoo, where he reads that an evil man
threw tobacco into a rhesus monkey’s eyes; this causes a flashback to
when town officials shot his dog Beetle for no reason. That character
corresponds with Nikolay Kadim and is supported in arguments [*] by
the librarian Alexey Shubulin. Auntie Styofa helps console Dyomka
after he has his leg amputated, and he in turn kisses the breasts of
Asya, who must undergo a mastectomy. The nurse Zoya must give hormone
treatments to the main character, making him impotent and thus unable
to have a relationship with Dr. Vera. FTP, name this novel in which
the polar opposites Pavel Rusanov and Oleg Kostoglotov share a room in
the titular location with number thirteen, a bleak work of Alexander
Solzhenitsyn. {Scalawags} (prompt on Republicans) James Alex Bagget
has argued that most of them were not actually uneducated or drawn
from the lower classes, though they were primarily urban. Violent
incidents involving them include the Battles of the Cabildo, which
took place during James Madison Wells’ term in office. Many had voted
for John Bell [*] in the previous election and their number included
the former guerilla leader John Singleton Mosby, as well as other
notable figures like Charles Hays, James Alcorn, and, most
notoriously, James Longstreet They were identified with Judas by
writers like Thomas Dixon and were often paired in invective with
their counterparts from the North. FTP give this term that
characterized any southern-born white who supported the Republican
Party during Reconstruction. The {Mower} The first work featuring this
character describes discoveries and notes that: “another world was
searched through the oceans new/ to find the marvel of Peru.” The
speaker then explains that a new obsession of the “Luxurious man,”
surely a reference to “tulip mania,” threatens to dispel the “wild and
fragrant innocence” of willing nature. In another this figure
addresses “country comets” and tells them not to waste “courteous
lights.” Featured in a total of four poems, [*] one of them finds this
figure, “once the true survey of all these meadows fresh and gray,”
mourning the loss of his love, Juliana, who did to his thoughts and
him what he does to the grass. FTP identify this figure who is
invoked, both “to the Glowworms” and “against Gardens,” in some poems
by Andrew Marvell. {Pike County Ballads} “On Pitz Languard” and “The
Sphinx of the Tuileries” are part of the second section called
“Wanderlieder.” A woman named Elsie and her kisses are remembered in
“How it Happened,” while the longish pseudo-epic “Guy of the Temple”
ends the collection. According to Bayard Taylor they took their name
from a California term for Missouri immigrants and the most popular
ones featured such lines as “Through the hot, black breath of the
burnin’ boat/ Jim Bludso’s voice was heard,” and “I want a chaw of
terbacker/ And that’s whats the matter with me.” Featuring such poems
as “Banty Tim” and “Little Breeches” [*] its author followed up their
success with the publication of his novel The Breadwinners. FTP
identify this collection of poems by a future secretary of state, a
pioneering work of regional literature, by John Hay. {pectin}s (accept
{galacturonan}s early) The enzyme HG methyltransferase synthesizes
them from nucleoside diphosphate monosaccharides, but they can be
degraded by EPGases produced by phytopathogenic bacteria and fungi.
Though their primary structure depends on a glycosyl residue
composition (*), they generally consist of 1,4-linked alpha
d-galactosyluronic acid and are also known as galacturonans. Known for
their affinity for polyamines that are present in plant cell walls,
their xylo- variety is found in apple and pine pollens. FTP, name
these polysaccharides found in the peels of citrus fruits which are
often used in the production of jams, jellies, and gels. Ivan
Stepanovich {Mazepa} Late in his life he fell in love with his god-
daughter Motrya causing a great rift between him and his friend
Kochubey. His own views were more moderate than those of his
counterpart Semen Palii and his early campaigns against the Tatars
were fought under the patronage of Prince Gallitzin. One legend about
him was fabricated when he threatened to expose a man named Pasek [*]
as a conspirator in the Polish court, where he served as advisor to
John Casimir. That tale, about a man who is dragged around on a horse
after he is discovered with a married woman, helped to spread this
hetman’s devil-may-care reputation and made him a favorite subject for
Romantic artists like Lord Byron. FTP identify this Cossack leader who
fought alongside Charles XII at the Battle of Poltava. {Miss Jean
Brodie}, accept {Jean} or Miss {Brodie} Later in life one of her
fellow characters writes a treatise on moral perception called “The
Transfiguration of the Commonplace”. The narrator tells us this in the
second chapter of the novel featuring her. She is surrounded by a
series of pithy clichés: Rose is “famous for sex”, Jenny is “an
intended actress”, and Mary MacGregor is “the silent lump” who most
feels her wrath. She pines after the art master [*] Mr. Lloyd, but
must instead settle for rejecting the eager Mr. Lowther. Ultimately,
she is undone by the treacherous Sandy Stewart who divulges her
fascination with fascism, especially Hitler. FTP Identify this
protagonist who works as the Marsha Blaines School for Girls in the
1961 novel by Muriel Spark. {Progress and Poverty} Its conclusion
quotes Guizot on “the end of all things,” but finishes hopefully with
a call to fight for “Truth and Right” alongside Ormuzd. That section,
“The Problem of Individual Life,” is preceded by a discussion of
“spurious capital” and “The Law of Interest,” which is tied to a
worker’s wages and, along with Malthusian explosions in population,
explains the counter-intuitive persistence [*] of the titular pair of
concepts. Ultimately it argues that “the remedy” lies not with
improved education or unionizing, but by introducing common ownership
of property. Containing many ideas first presented in the author’s
“Our Land and Land Policy,” FTP, what is this book that argued for a
single land tax, a work by Henry George. {Foraker} Act (accept
{Organic} Act before it is said) Section 33 of this law vested the
power of the Judiciary with Brigadier General Davis, though this was
later altered by the Olmsted Amendment. The Unionist Party was founded
four years after it was passed in order to protest what they claimed
were unfair provisions. These provisions included a five person
Cabinet that, like Governor Charles Allen, was chosen by the
President, and the fact that, although there was an exemption from
paying income taxes, indigenous people had no opportunity to elect
their own representatives. Named for an Ohio Senator, [*] this bill
was made obsolete seventeen years later with the passing of the more
inclusive Jones Act. Also known by the alternate title, the “Organic
Act,” it asserted San Juan’s status as capital, FTP, identify this law
passed in 1900 that established a civilian government in Puerto Rico.
{Banquet of Herod} or {Feast of Herod} Originally commissioned from
Jacopo della Quercia, its artist used tiles, projecting beams, and the
knives on the table to help create its necessary perspective. The
architecture divides the scene into three parts and invites us to gaze
back through the trio of arched windows to the very back panel which
begins the work’s narrative, that was requested by the Siennese laity
for its Cathedral Baptistry, [*] with the carrying of a platter. Two
young children can be seen grimacing on the bottom left, while the
middle sequence features a musician whose playing accompanies a
maniacal dance that shocks the title figure and his guests in the
front panel. FTP identify this bronze relief that depicts Salome
kicking up her heels after the death of John the Baptist at the title
event, a work by Donatello. {elephantiasis} (accept {lymphatic
filariasis} before mentioned, accept {river blindness} until “Manson”)
Though it is not caused by a bacterium, its causative agent contains
vacuoles full of symbiotic bacteria, allowing Indian physicians to
treat it with antibiotics. Diethylcarbamazine and albendazole (*) are
more commonly used to treat it, and the former is often put into table
salt to prevent this disease. In 1878, Patrick Manson showed that its
causative microorganism is spread by Culex mosquitoes. Caused by
filarial nematodes such as Wuchereria bancrofti and Brugia malayi.
FTP, name this tropical disease, a parasitic worm infection marked by
grotesque enlargement of extremities. Thomas {Otway} His comedies
including Friendship and Passion and The Atheist were performed less
often than more serious works. After a failed attempt as an actor in
Aphra Behn’s troupe of traveling players, he enlisted in the army,
serving in Holland. In one of his plays, twin sons fight over the hand
of Castalio’s wife. In another, the whore Aquilina bawdily chastises
the senator Antonio, that work also features Belvidera’s famous mad
scene. [*] He adapted the works of Moliere to create the Cheats of
Scapin and looked to Racine for inspiration in Titus Berenice.  Other
tragedies include Alcibiades and a Don Carlos in blank verse; but he
is most famous for the story of the Conspirator Jaffeir. FTP Identify
this playwright of The Orphan and Venice Preserv’d. {Lakme} The second
part features “The Bell Song” and ends with the chorus “They cry for
vengeance.” This occurs after Miss Bentson and her charges, Rose and
Ellen, have left the bazaar, and the hero has been beaten almost to
death. After trespassing and finding some jewelry on a bench he had
fallen in love, a sentiment shared by the heroine in the song “Why?”
The work ends with the lovers leaving behind the faithful Mallika and
Hadji, [*] and retreating to a forest enclosure where, with the help
of some magic water, the heroine nurses Gerald back to health before
killing herself. Based on a novel by Pierre Loti called Rarahu it
enjoyed a much greater success than its composer’s attempts at more
serious fare like Jeu de Nivelle. Opening in a temple overseen by the
jealous Brahmin Nilakantha, FTP, identify this work named for the
titular Hindu priestess, an opera by Leo Delibes. Publius {Clodius}
Pulcher This man's first appearance in history is as a lieutenant to
his brother-in-law Lucullus, against whom he apparently incited a
mutiny. Caesar later assisted him in legally acquiring plebeian
status. His death in 52 B.C. was the cause of riots in which the
Senate-house was burned. That death had come about as a result of a
pitched battle between [*]  thugs hired by this man and those hired by
Titus Milo. As tribune of the plebs in 58, this demagogue managed to
get Cicero exiled, because the latter had at various times accused him
of incest and of attending a women-only religious ritual in drag. FTP,
name this ally of Julius Caesar who changed the spelling of his name
when he renounced his membership in the patrician Claudian family.
{Biot-Savart} Law Its differential version allows for one to create
models of pi ring currents induced in para- and diatropic planar
molecules by a perpendicular magnetic field. Likewise, it can be used
in tandem with current density to calculate the magnetic shielding
tensor. For a wire (*) of infinite length, it states that the flux
density is exactly equal to the permeability of free space times the
current divided by the quantity two pi times the distance of the point
in question from the conductor. Stating that the magnetic induction
near a straight conductor is inversely proportional to the distance
from the conductor directly proportional to the current in the
conductor, FTP, what is this law named for its two French discoverers?
{The Sickness Unto Death} Some critics have seen the genesis of this
book in the Gilleleje letter of 1835 where its author wrote that “a
person must first learn to know himself before learning anything
else.” The author discusses the meeting of an incarnate God via an
example using Shakespeare’s Prince Henry and he uses the metaphor of a
balloonist divesting himself of weights to account for the sinking
feeling that the title [*] condition can produce. The second chapter
focuses on “Sin” while the Introduction puns on the origins of the
title during its discussion of Lazarus. Subtitled “A Christian
Psychological Exposition for Upbuilding and Awakening,” FTP, identify
this companion piece to The Concept of Anxiety which discusses
Kierkegaard’s thoughts about the pervasiveness of despair. Yury
Karlovich {Olesha} Much of his later life was taken up with the
writing of his autobiography No Day Without a Line and his poetry was
collected in the volumes About Lisa and Chisel. Verses A fervent
supporter of the Revolution he worked on the journal Gudok with his
contemporaries Il’f and Petrov. He adapted his most famous work, a
novel that ends with the ascension of the football playing Volodia
Makarov and his fiancé Valia, into the play The Conspiracy of
Feelings. Other works include stories in The Cherry Stone [*] and a
tale about the circus stars Tibul and Suok in The Three Fat Men. But
he remains best known for his story documenting Nikolai Kavalerov’s
resentment at Andrei Babichev. FTP identify this Russian novelist and
short story writer best known for Envy. {Otus and Ephialtes} Some
stories credit them with introducing the cult of the Muses and
founding the city of Ascra. They were buried in Anthedon, but would
eventually end up bound against a column by writhing snakes in
Tartarus. Conceived by waves that washed over the lap of Triops’
daughter, Eriboea sabotaged [*] one of their schemes, which was
performed to avenge Adonis, by telling Hermes where he could find the
great bronze jar in which they had captured Ares. These sons of
Iphimedia, who were sometimes known as the “Aloadae,” were killed when
a deer ran between them and each of the twins hit his brother trying
to kill it. FTP identify these sons of Poseidon who tried to pile up
the mountains so that they could reach the land of the Gods to capture
Artemis and Hera. {Santa Fe} Its downtown plaza adjacent to the St.
Francis Cathedral and the Loretto Chapel – home of the “Miracle
Staircase” and to the northeast sits Old Fort Marcy. A brief
interregnum that saw indigenous leadership was overcome when governor
Diego de Vargas reasserted power at this site located in the [*]
Sangre de Cristo Mountains. Other attractions in this city situated at
the northern terminus of the Camino Real include the restored Lensic
theater, the flagship Coyote Café, and the always yonic Georgia
O’Keefe museum. This setting for the film The Tao of Steve is located
south of the Rio Grande Gorge and east of the city of Los Alamos. FTP
name this city located approximately an hour north on I-25 from
Albuquerque, the capital of New Mexico. {V} Melanie l’Heuremaudit is
loved by this character, but impales herself on a pole during a dance,
according to a story told by the composer Porcepic. Described using
pervasive references to Henry Adams’ Education, Fausto gives this
character the sacrament of Extreme Unction when, as “The Bad Priest,”
this figure’s [*] star sapphire navel, fake feet, wig, and dentures
all turn out to be Maltese children after a World War II bombing raid.
As Veronica Manganese she wears a bonnet and cape, while as Vera
Meroving she has a glass eye that contains a timepiece, and represents
the increasing entropy of a decaying society. Both Benny Profane and
the protagonist are drawn to seek her out. FTP, name this mysterious
woman who is obsessively pursued by Herbert Stencil, the title
character of a Thomas Pynchon novel. {Lucknow} Pact Its 16th and final
point called for a separation of the Executive and Judiciary branches.
The fourth point advocated the establishment of a system of weightage
and the fifth set 150 as the number of seats in the Central
Legislative Council. The penultimate point established the ethnic
criterion for at least one of the two Under Secretaries. Its
provisions held in place for eight years, only collapsing after the
Khilafat Movement. Many of its stipulations were negotiated by B.G.
Tilak, the major Congress leader, though he argued against formal
recognition of the opposition party. Chiefly orchestrated by Muhammad
Ali Jinnah, FTP, identify this 1916 pact for Hindu- Muslim relations
reached in the namesake north central Indian city. {Bus Stop} The
character of Vern Dobson is mentioned but never appears onstage.
Another character is a former academic who suggests the performance of
Romeo and Juliet that commences in Act Two of this play. That
character, Dr. Lyman, schemes to meet up with innocent Elma in a
nearby city while both of them are stranded at the title location due
to a snow storm. Other stranded figures include young Cherie and the
rough cowboy who pursues her, Bo Decker. The final pages reveal the
extent of the relationship between Carl and Grace, the latter a
waitress at the title location, a diner between Kansas City and
Topeka. FTP, name this play by William Inge. {Alfven} waves (prompt on
magnetosonic before it is mentioned) _ _In the solar wind they can
have wavelengths on the scale of an Earth radius giving a long-scale
coherence of them that play a significant role in magnetosphere-
ionosphere coupling. First postulated to explain the sunspot cycle,
(*) they have been used in the heating of Tokamak plasmas by
perturbing the magnetic field in the plasma. The compressional variety
is often called a magnetosonic wave and these waves are often derived
using the equations of ideal magnetohydrodynamics. FTP what are these
ion-carried waves commonly described as the result of “plucking” the
magnetic field lines in a plasma, named for their Swedish formulator?
{Women of Algiers} A cut-off, golden mirror slopes down on the top
left side, while a somewhat, slanted, but partially opened window can
be seen in the center of the background. Shoes and pillows lie strewn
about a floor whose color matches the wall and the outfits of the
persons depicted. Rich splashes of red break up the composition as a
black serving woman, who is turning back to face the languorous trio
[*] sitting in front of a hookah, is walking towards the right of the
painting. Presenting a scene that could be interpreted as a more
peaceful version of the same court depicted in its creator’s previous
orientalist masterpiece The Death of Sardanapalus, FTP, identify this
1834 work whose title figures inhabit a harem interior in North
Africa, a work by Eugene Delacroix. E(rnst) T(heodor) A(madeus)
{Hoffmann} One of his stories tells of a student who desires an
Archivist’s serpent daughter but falls for another woman after the
interference of a fortune teller. Another involves the goldsmith
Cardillac who is caught up in a series of jewel thefts. Yet another is
about Nicholas, who is tormented by the title character, a chemist who
killed his father. All of these stories appeared before he published
his novels, which include Meister Floh and Kater Murr, the Educated
Cat. FTP, name this man whose stories like “The Golden Pot,”
“Mademoiselle de Scudery,” and the “Sandman” appeared in his
collection The Serapion Brothers, a German romantic writer perhaps
best known as the source for a Jacques Offenbach opera. {nitrile}s
Their alpha-alkoxy variety undergoes the Thorpe reaction in the
presence of tris-methyllithium at -78 degrees Celsius. Their adipo-
hydrodimer is key to the production of nylon, and they can be made
aromatic via the dehydration of oximes with phosphorus pentoxide. The
Ritter reaction (*) is an acid- induced nucleophilic addition of them
to a carbenium ion, which eventually results in an amide. Catalytic
hydrogenation of them in the presence of nickel or cobalt also results
in an amide, but when they are reacted with Grignard reagents, ketones
result. Formed by Letts synthesis, FTP, name these organic chemical
compounds which contain a nitrogen triple bonded to a carbon. Louis
{Riel} Despite the recommendations of leniency by the jury, this man
was sentenced to death by Judge Hugh Richardson. After the ignorance
of his six- point List of Rights, he orchestrated the murder of Thomas
Scott, an experience that led him to adopt a later more nonviolent
approach by curbing the aggression of his military head, Gabriel
Dumont. He would finally be cornered following the fall of Batoche
[buh-TOSZH], which occurred about a year after he returned from exile
as a teacher of a Jesuit school in Montana. FTP, name this man who was
executed in 1885 for his role as a leader of the Metis and the Red
River Rebellion. {Rappacini’s Daughter} The preface to this work
explains that it is lifted from a translation of the Count Bearhaven.
That translation was of a tale by the author of “The Voyage of
Celeste,” one Monsieur de l’Aubepine. The work itself begins with the
hero taking up residence in a mansion kept by Dame Lisabetta. The hero
is newly arrived in Padua and is unaware of a feud between his
neighbor and the man whose triumphant exclamation ends this work,
Signor Baglioni. Thus, Giovanni Guasconti unknowingly effects the
death of his love, the title character. FTP, name this work in which
that title character is pure poison, a story by Nathaniel Hawthorne.
Battle of {Isandlwana} An eclipse of the sun that halted fighting
occurred about an hour before the end of this battle. The eventual
losers were lulled into overconfidence by the presence of their new
Martini-Henry rifles and as a result no wagon perimeter was set up by
Lord Chelmsford. That same night an equally fierce battle was waged at
the nearby site of Rorke’s Drift. Despite victory at the latter
locale, the British plan to strike toward the enemy kraal at Ulundi
was undone by this loss. FTP, name this 1879 defeat of British forces
by roughly 20,000 Zulu warriors. Ludwig {Prandtl} Saddled with the
task of improving a machine to remove shavings, he found that no
matter how low a fluid’s viscosity was, the fluid would always remain
stationary at the walls of the pipe. With M.B. Glauert, his name
graces a phenomenon in which “clouds” condense around a supersonic (*)
airplane’s jet intakes, wings and shockwaves caused by the plane’s
breaking of the sound barrier. With his most famous student, Theodore
von Karman, he discovered that vortices could induce drag, leading to
a revolution in aircraft design. FTP, name this “father of aerodynamic
theory,” whose namesake dimensionless number is the ratio of a fluid’s
viscosity to its thermal conductivity. Claude Henri de Rouvroy, Comte
de {Saint Simon} He claimed to be a descendant of Charlemagne and
after serving in the American Revolution he made a small fortune
speculating on confiscated lands. Early works like his Letter from a
citizen in Geneva were written recoup his fortune, but soon he and
followers like Bazard, Enfantin, and Thierry [*] were singing another
tune. Arguing for the division of man into “families” in works like
Dissertation on the Knowledge of Man, this man appealed to Louis XIII
to shift his administration to a meritocracy and to believe in the
power of science and technology. These ideas, presented in works like
The Industry and Industrial Catechism, won over a young Auguste Comte
and inaugurated French socialism. FTP identify this thinker best known
for his reformist manifesto The New Christianity. Zend-{Avesta} Its
major section begins with eight unnamed chapters, the only unnamed
parts of this work. Three of its fragments are only known by English
names: Gray, Westergaard, and Darmesteter. The Westergaard section is
followed by the Hadhokt, which gives an explanation of the soul’s
final destination, which itself can be determined based on the ritual
specifications outlined in the Nirangistan. Its Khorda part is
basically a book of common prayer, while extensions to the liturgy are
the subject of the Visperad. FTP, name this work that is also composed
of the Vendidad and the Yasnas and Gathas, the sacred collection of
Zoroastrian scriptures. {M}artin {Amis} (prompt on just last name) He
criticizes both Penthouse Forum and Thomas Harris’ Hannibal in his
recent essay collection The War Against Cliché. One of his novels
tells of the intertwined planning of murders of Nicola Six and the
Earth itself, while his most successful novel follows a director of
fast food videos, John “Slick” Self. In Visiting Mrs. Nabokov and
Other Excursions he included an obituary of Philip Larkin, a good
friend of his father’s, but it is for his tale of the separate
consciousnesses in ex-Nazi doctor Tod T. Friendly that he won a Booker
Prize. FTP, name this writer of the novels London Fields, Money, and
Time’s Arrow, the son of novelist Kingsley. {topoisomerase}s Quinolone
and coumarin are two antibacterial substances that work by inhibiting
one class of these enzymes. Adriamycin, ellipticine, and the alkaloid
camptothecin (*) also inhibit the activity of these enzymes, and are
thus used as possible anticancer drugs. Their type II class operates
by having the substrate molecule bind to tyrosine residues on the
active site, forming a “G segment” and a “T segment,” and, ultimately,
changing the linking number of the substrate. Often used for
decatenation and cleavage for assays, all of them are able to relax
negative supercoils, effectively opposing the action of DNA gyrase.
FTP, name these enzymes which are responsible for sorting out the
topological tangles of the DNA double helix. {Clovis} (or
{Chlodowech}) The third of this name only ruled until the age of
thirteen and was controlled by a regent from Austrasia. The second
married an Anglian aristocrat whom he bought as a slave. The first
consolidated his power with the help of the chieftain Ragnachar. He
gained more help via the strategic marrying off of his sister
Audofleda and by the time of his victory at Tolbiac, it had been six
years since his defeat of the Roman official Syagrius and even longer
since he had subdued the Ripuarian branch of his people. FTP, name
this man who married Clotilde, the son of Childeric I, and first king
of a united Frankish people. {The Chrysanthemum and the Sword} “The
Circle of Human Feelings” discusses the particulars of bathing,
eating, and sexual activity, all the while noting that there is an
implicit tension between pleasure and the desire “to harden oneself.”
Other sections of this work focus on “the dilemma of virtue” and the
prevailing theme of obligations to one’s land [*] or one’s ancestors.
Its author took John Embree’s earlier work, Suye Mura, as a model and
its most perceptive moments occur during the analysis of “taking one’s
station,” an idealization of the hierarchical that the author connects
to the willingness of pilots to sacrifice themselves. Named for a pair
of contrasting symbols, that represent the way of the artist versus
the way of the warrior, FTP, identify this work subtitled “Patterns of
Japanese Culture” by Ruth Benedict. Asa Philip {Randolph} Due to some
death threats, he was occasionally forced to hold political meetings
at his wife Lucille Green’s beauty salon. Nearly 40 years later, he
planned his most famous event with the help of A.J. Muste. While at
City College and with the help of Chandler Owen he founded the radical
magazine that he used as his bully pulpit. He proposed such measures
as his $185 billion Freedom Budged through that magazine, The
Messenger. FTP, name this man who, in 1941, threatened FDR with a
March on Washington, 16 years after he organized the strike of the
Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters. Mount {Meru} According to one
legend, it, along with its counterparts, was formed when a herd of
flying elephants displeased Indra and he cut off their wings to stop
them from moving. Symbolized and worshipped via the sacred Yantras, at
the end of each Yuga Vasuki emerges from underneath the seven worlds
that lie below it [*] to unveil his fiery breath and destroy the
universe. In addition, to Chi Gyatso, a body of water that contains
the four mortal worlds, copious tress and fruits can be found on its
precious stone encrusted slopes. Surrounded by seven lakes and seven
other summits, Brahma’s Golden City lies at its peak and the Ganges
flows from the very top, FTP, identify this mythical mountain that
exists at the center of the Hindu cosmos. {Un Ballo in Maschera} or {A
Masked Ball} The simpleton Silvano is fooled by a gipsy and never seen
again, while the opening of its second section features a veiled woman
hunting for herbs and singing the solo “Ecco l’orrido campo” in order
to forget her illicit love. The mocking chorus “Seguitemi” finds the
conspirators, Sam and Tom, [*] enjoying the conformation of Ulrica’s
prophecy and planning to make their move at the title event. Eugene
Scribe originally wrote the story for a work by Auber, but due to a
general uneasiness with depicting regicide, by the time Somma got a
hold of the libretto he had to shift the setting from Sweden to
America. Thus Amelia’s husband, the vengeful Renato, is described as a
Creole and his one-time best friend, the Earl of Warwick, Riccardo, is
the Governor of Boston. FTP identify this work by Verdi that climaxes
at a dance where everyone attends in disguise. {Canzoniere} (or {Book
of Songs}; accept early buzz of {Rerum vulgarium fragmenta}) The
fourth of them claims that God chose Judea for “above all else / it
pleased him to exalt humility,” and the twelfth ends “At least I may
be granted for my tears / The comfort of a few belated sighs.” The
second of them begins by mentioning Love’s determination to “take up
graceful revenge / and punish in one day a thousand wrongs,” and the
first opens “O you who hear within these scattered verses.” It was Sir
Thomas Wyatt’s reading of many of the pieces in this collection, also
known as Rerum vulgarium fragmenta, that introduced him to the
innovation he brought back to England. FTP, name this collection of
365 love poems to Laura, the major work of Francesco Petrarch. {Jennie
Gerhardt} In a 1933 film adaptation of it directed by Marion Gering,
Edward Arnold and Donald Cook played lovers of the title character,
who was played by Sylvia Sidney. In the 50th chapter of this book,
Mrs. Gerald takes a house on Drexel Boulevard to be nearer to the main
male character. In the first chapter, the title character and her
mother present themselves as the clerk’s desk of the principal hotel
[*] in a Midwestern city and ask for work cleaning. A passage about
contraceptives in this book was famously removed by the author’s
editor, Ripley Hitchcock. The title character’s daughter dies after
she leaves Lester Kane, though she lost her virginity to a politician
named Brander. FTP, name this 1911 work, the second novel written by
Theodore Dreiser. {Livius} Name's the same: Marcus [BLANK] Drusus was
an opponent of Gaius Gracchus and proposed a massive extension of
citizenship. His son of the same name proposed a reactionary reform of
the constitution and was assassinated in 91 B.C., thus triggering the
Social War. The Romans thought their literature basically began with a
[*] translation of the Odyssey into Latin by [BLANK] Andronicus. The
most famous holder of the name was a rhetorician from Padua who
published the last 22 books of his magnum opus posthumously because
they dealt with the contemporary history of the Emperor Augustus. FTP,
give the name shared by these men, the last of whom describes the
kings of Rome, the early Republic and the second Punic War in the
surviving books of his massive history Ab Urbe Condita. {Gregory VII}
One of his teachers at the Schola Cantorum, Giovanni Graziano,
inspired him to choose the name he would later assume. That teacher of
his was deposed at the Council of Sutri, after which this man
accompanied him into exile. Recalled to Rome by Leo IX, he served as
legate to the Synod of Tours at which the nature of the Eucharist was
discussed by Berengarius. During his[*] reign, a group of bishops met
at Brixen and named the archbishop of Ravenna, Guibert, his successor.
After his defender Rudolf of Rheinfelden was killed at the Elster, he
was compelled to hide in the castle of St. Angelo and watched Clement
III crowned in his place. He died in 1085, after being rescued from
captivity by Robert Guiscard. FTP, name this Pope whose original name
was Hildebrand and who had a notable controversy over lay investiture
with Henry IV. {Dance Dance Dance} The protagonist of this novel has
sex with a prostitute named June, who is hired for him by the father
of one of his friends. He also has sex with a prostitute named Mei,
who is hired for him by an actor friend whom he knew in high school
and reconnected with after seeing in Unrequited Love. He used to have
sex with an ear model named Kiki, whom he spends most of the book
searching for. The intrigue centers around the mysterious Dolphin
Hotel, where the protagonist meets a girl named Yuki [*] and a curious
figure who may be the ghost of his old friend Rat. The protagonist got
a job as a freelance writer after quitting a translation business, as
we learn in the novel to which this is a sequel, A Wild Sheep Chase.
FTP, name this book in which the protagonist is repeatedly adjured to
engage in the titular activity, a work by Haruki Murakami. Battle of
{Fallen Timbers} A failed last charge occurred at what is now Monclova
Road, and saw the death of Lt. Henry Towles, who, after Robert
Miscampbell, was the highest ranking American casualty. This battle
began as a retaliatory response to an earlier raid on Fort [*]
Recovery that prompted the Americans’ opponents to change commanders.
A major factor in the aftermath was the British decision to maintain
neutrality by closing the doors of Fort Maumee, preventing a
regrouping of the defeated forces of the Shawnee chief Blue Jacket.
FTP, name this battle that effectively won Ohio for the Americans, a
victory of Mad Anthony Wayne. {Gerontion} Yvor Winters disapproved of
the reference in this poem to a figure who walked all night in the
next room at Limoges. Another figure mentioned in this poem was
shifting candles in the dark room, while a third was bowing among the
Titians. In addition to Madame de Tornquist, Mr. Silvero, and
Hakagawa, this poem mentions De Bilhache, Fresca, and Mrs. Cammel, who
were all whirled beyond the circuit of the shuddering bear in
fractured atoms. [*] The speaker confesses to having lost his sight,
smell, hearing, taste and touch, and asks how he can use his passion
for our closer contact, though a better-known question in this poem
asks “After such knowledge, what forgiveness?” We also learn that
“signs are taken for wonders” from an “old man in a dry month” who
speaks the poem, which has an epigraph from Measure for Measure. FTP,
name this dramatic monologue by T. S. Eliot. (thyro){calcitonin} Its
namesake gene-related peptide may induce a rostral spread of
nociception to the trigeminal nerve, causing so-called “suicide
headaches.” It works by forcing the body to produce hydroxyapatite.
Often used as a treatment for Paget's disease, (*) it has also been
known to assuage cases of osteoporosis. Discovered in 1961 by Harold
Copp, it consists of one chain of 33 amino acids and, unlike
thyroxine, it is not iodated. FTP, name this hormone which inhibits
the action of osteoclasts, works in opposition to parathyroid hormone,
and is released by the parafollicular cells of the thyroid gland when
the plasma concentration of a certain element is too high. {Sven}
{Forkbeard} or {Sweyn I} or {Svend Tveskaeg} He was incensed by an
action which took place on November 13, allegedly on a Saturday
because that was the day when a certain group took their baths. That
action which outraged him was instigated by Eadric, and took place on
Saint Brice’s Day. This grandson of Gorm the Old forced his father to
flee to Wendland and allied himself with the earl of Lade and [*]Olaf
Skotkonung, who combined to win the battle of Svolder. He led a number
of campaigns against the English under Ethelred II, which began when
the latter decided to massacre all the Danes living in England, and
eventually forced Ethelred to flee the country, which allowed his son
to become joint monarch of England and Denmark. FTP, name this Viking
warrior who established a North Sea empire around the year 1000 and
fathered Canute. {Four Apostles} Two feet threaten to bleed over from
the grayish floor into the inscriptions on the bottom of this work.
Originally intended as part of a “sacred conversation” picture, the
scene was painted to flank a Madonna that was never completed because
Nuremberg reformed [*] while it was in progress. The two men on the
left, one of whom wears a sumptuous gold and red robe, have their eyes
closed, while the two on the right seem to be staring out at the
viewer. Some critics have noted that the subjects represent the
temperaments, choleric, melancholic, sanguine, and phlegmatic, but the
work’s popular title seems to imply that the two panels depicts John,
Peter, Mark, and Paul. FTP identify this painting of a certain number
of religious followers by Albrecht Durer. {Clostridium} The
stercorarium species is a cellulolytic hyperthermophile with the
highest known maximum temperature of survival, while the pasteurianum
species was the first free-living nitrogen fixer discovered. Its
constituents cause disease via the production of zinc-endopeptidases
(*) that cleave a peptide bond in a SNARE protein. Rarely multiplying
in vivo because its members are obligate anaerobes, its dificile
species can cause intestinal mucosa damage, while the septicum and
perfringens species are the causative agents of gangrene. FTP, name
this genus of gram-positive, spore-forming bacteria which includes the
species that cause tetanus and botulism. {Anti-Rent} War One of the
sides in this conflict featured Osman “Bud” Steele, whose rallying cry
“Lead can’t penetrate Steele!” proved incorrect. It came to a head
when forces gathered at Dingle Hill after hearing that the cattle of
Moses Earle were going to be seized. As a consequence of it, a Whig
politician named John Young [*]was elected governor of a certain
state. The actual fighting ended in 1846, when Governor Silas Wright
resorted to a legislative solution. Also known as the Helderberg War,
it began when a certain group rejected the demands of some descendants
of Stephen van Rensselaer. FTP, name this conflict which took place in
Albany County, New York, when some tenant farmers objected to paying
for their land. Alexander {Glazunov} This man told H.G. Wells that he
would finish composing when his manuscript paper ran out, and with the
exception of late works like his four preludes and fugues for piano
and his Saxophone Concerto he kept his word. Choral compositions
include the Coronation Cantata and Hymn to Pushkin. His Triumphal
March was completed for the Columbian Exposition during one of his
many travels from St. Petersburg, [*] where he served as director of
composition at the conservatory. He never finished his ninth symphony,
but did complete some notable music for violin such as Meditation in D
as well as the romantic, sweeping Concerto in A minor. Although he
completed and orchestrated Prince Igor from memory, he never finished
an opera of his own and his current fame rests on his ballet music.
FTP identify this composer of the works Stenka Razin, Raymonda, and
The Seasons. Josiah {Royce} Gabriel Marcel wrote a book on his
“metaphysics” that focused on this man’s treatment of “the one and the
many.” In an essay of the same name this man argued for “The
Possibility of Error,” [*] which would imply the actuality of “an
infinite unity of conscious thought.” Other works include his literary
criticism collected in the volume Fugitive Essays and a novel, The
Feud of Oakfield Creek. His two-part Gifford lecture, consisting of
“The Four Historical Conceptions of Being” and “Nature, Man, and the
Moral Order,” was published as The World and the Individual and other
works composed while he was at Harvard include The Concept of God and
The Spirit of Modern Philosophy. FTP identify this idealistic thinker
best known for his theory of the Absolute which he promoted in his
masterwork, The Religious Aspect of Philosophy. Mikhail {Lermontov} He
wrote about a black wooden object that reigns over a lonely precipice
in “The Cross on the Rock,” while he imagines the titular object lying
under a curtain of cold mists in his beloved Scottish highlands in
“The Grave of Ossian.” He noted that the titular artist understood sad
and unconscious dreams in “To the Picture of Rembrandt,” while he
wrote about the cold souls of people in a “lousy crowd” in “Waves and
People.” His other poems include “The Cliff” and “No, It Was Not You I
Loved So Fervently,” though he also wrote dramas like A Strange Man
and [*] Masquerade. Thanks to his friend Zhukovsky, he was allowed to
return to Moscow in 1838, after which he wrote such poems as “Valerik”
and “Demon.” FTP, name this Russian author best known for a novel
about the unlikable Pechorin, A Hero of Our Time. {Neel} temperature
It can be derived as a function of doping using a generalized
Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless renormalization group theory. It can
also be defined as the minimum or maximum of the second-order partial
derivative of resistivity with respect to temperature, (*) depending
on whether the material's resistivity has a peak. It is significantly
lower for nanocrystalline chromiumthan it is for strain-free single-
crystal chromium, as the former does not need to be as warm for its
atomic magnetic dipoles to align with an external magnetic field. FTP,
name this analog of the Curie temperature, the point above which an
antiferromagnetic material becomes paramagnetic. {Yin and Yang} Liu
Hai is sometimes represented alongside these entities that were born
with the giant Pangu in the [*] primordial egg. It then took him
18,000 years to forge a substantial distance between them. Often
invoked to prevent the entry of demons into a household, animals
associated with their interaction include the phoenix and the dragon.
The back of a tortoise inspired Fu Xi to identify the trigrams of the
Bagua that often surround representations of these two entities. FTP
name this two word concept that originated in the Chinese creation
myth and expresses the interaction between the dark and light
opposites compose the universe. Charles {Kingsley} He attacked Emerson
in a dialogue about “loose thoughts for loose thinkers,” Phaethon. His
visit to the West Indies in the last years of his life is described in
At Last, while his other late works include the narrative poem
Andromeda, the lyric “The Sands of Dee,” and the essays collected in
Plays and Puritans. His first historical novel was subtitled “New Foes
with an Old Face,” [*]while he wrote about the recent past in Two
Years Ago and about the defeat of the Spanish Armada in an 1855 work.
He attached the clothing industry in Cheap Clothes and Nasty, a
pamphlet written from a Christian socialist perspective, while his
first novel depicts the struggles of Lancelot Smith. In addition to
Yeast, his books include Alton Locke and Hereward the Wake. FTP, name
this English author of Hypatia, The Water-Babies, and Westward Ho!.
{Vagus} Nerve One treatment for epilepsy involves wrapping a cuff
around it that delivers pulses of electricity several times per hour
and decay of it may play a role indiabetic gastroparesis. The mastoid
canaliculus allows passage (*) of its auricular branch above the
stylomastoid foramen. It forms the ganglion nosodum after passing
through the carotid sheath between the internal jugular vein and
carotid artery. Beginning between the olive and inferior peduncles of
the medulla oblongada, its Celiac, Hepatic, and Gastric Branches are
found in the abdomen. FTP, name this 10th cranial nerve, well known
for controlling and keeping the larynx open. The {Fable of the Bees}
It features a digression on the pleasures of pineapple during a series
of Dialogues between Horatio and Cleomenes. It notes that the very
poor in the present live better than the rich did in the past and, in
another section, compares the careers of Cato and Cicero, concluding
that the latter is the better man for being “a fulsome trumpeter of
his own [*] praises.” Published with a prefatory essay entitled An
Enquiry into the Origin of Moral Virtue as well as twenty Remarks,
that explicated its poetical inspiration, it argues that convenience
and decency depend on social class and that every species of public
benefit is basically some form of private vice. FTP identify this work
that was based on its author’s poem “The Grumbling Hive” a work by
Bernard Mandeville. {praetor} This office lent its name to an edict
which one of its holders would make each year outlining the procedures
he would use to apply the city's law. The most important ones were the
peregrinus, who had jurisdiction over all cases involving foreigners,
and the urbanus, who handled internal jurisprudence. The number grew
from one to two and then to [*] four, six and eight in order to
provide governors for newly conquered Roman provinces. This increased
competition in the Roman political system by repeatedly doubling the
number of candidates for the highest magistracy. FTP, name this
judicial office of the Roman Republic ranking immediately under and
serving as a prerequisite for that of consul. {D’Alembert}’s Paradox
(or Theorem) One can derive it by using the Kutta-Joukowski theorem,
or from the symmetry inherent in Bernoulli’s equation. However, “skin
friction” at the boundary layer [*] is produced, which means that
fluids do in fact have an internal physical mechanism for dissipating
energy into heat. Thus, this theorem is easily resolved with knowledge
that certain types of fluids do not exist, so its statement that
Laplacian flow produces no drag cannot be true. FTP, name this
paradoxical theorem of fluid mechanics which also states that no
forces act on a body in an incompressible, inviscid fluid, and is
named for its French formulator. {Rustem} He perishes after a jealous
king tricks him and his faithful steed, Rakhsh, to fall into a pit
full of spears. Born as a result of a wizard’s incantation and the
help of Simurgh’s magic feathers, the color white plays a large part
in the life of this mythological figure. For example, he kills a
rampaging white elephant with an ox-headed mace, defeats the White
Demon [*] summoned by Ahriman, and is born to the lovely Rudabeh and
his father, a man with white hair named Zal. Tall as eight normal men,
his exploits were set down in a work by Firdousi, FTP, identify this
literary figure, the chief hero of the Shahnamah. {Das Lied von der
Erde} or {The Song of the Earth} Bruno Walter conducted its premiere
in Munich six months after the composer’s passing, choosing to play
the first section’s ferocious A minor Allegro dreamily rather than
maniacally. The third and fourth movements, “Of Youth” and “Of Beauty”
are more upbeat than the solemn scoring of the earlier “The Lonely One
in Autumn.” [*] Perhaps best known for its haunting finale “The
Farewell,” which mixes the solo voice with touches of celesta, harp,
and mandolin, this song cycle was based on a collection of texts
translated by Hans Bethge from the Chinese. FTP identify this six part
orchestral work by Mahler. {The Revolt of the Masses} The author
points out that modernity has created persons that eschew reason for
strong opinion, and think of themselves as fully developed,
“excellent, complete.” Beginning with a consideration of what the
author calls “agglomeration or plenitude” it notes that it “is false
to say that history [*] cannot be foretold,” Its chapters including “A
Statistical Fact” and “The Barbarism of Specialization” were primarily
drawn from essays its author wrote for the magazine El Sol. It
pronounces the coming of a European confederation and expands on the
ideas found in the author’s previous work, Invertebrate Spain,
ultimately concluding that nations are to be ruled by a benevolent,
intellectual elite. FTP identify this 1930 work which argues against
the decaying effects of the mob, a treatise by Jose Ortega y Gasset.
{Kumarbi} His servant goddesses were known as the Irshirra and they
took care of his greatest creation until he could be set “like a
spire” on the right shoulder of the giant Upelluri in order to reach
the heavens. When finally born, his son destroyed the Temple of Hebat
as he sought to avenge the indignities suffered by this father of his.
He had earlier been tricked into producing [*] three powerful rivals,
including Aranzah, Tashmishu, and Teshub, after he had destroyed Anu
by biting off his penis and being forced to swallow the latter’s seed.
But eventually he, and his “stone born” son Ullikummi, are defeated by
Ea. FTP identify this Hurrian creator god who was later worshipped by
the Hittites. John Bell {Hood} When this man's native Kentucky refused
to leave the Union, he signed up to fight for the state he had served
in in the old army. He first gained distinction at Gaines' Mill,
although he took little part in the Seven Days. His rapid attacks
saved the Southern army from severe defeat first at South Mountain and
then at [*] Antietam, after which he as promoted the army's youngest
major general. Eventually he was transferred to the West, where after
a time commanding a corps for Joseph Johnston, he took over the entire
defense of Atlanta. FTP, name this Texan, who repeatedly destroyed his
own army by recklessly attacking much larger Union forces first before
Atlanta and later at Franklin. {Gabriel}’s Synthesis It was used in
the production of Sceptrin alkaloids, but suffered low output due to
problems with selective hydrolysis of acetyl groups. Ganem’s sodium
borohydride reduction protocol allows the liberation of this
reaction’s product to proceed more quickly. Producing products similar
to those of the Eschweiler-Clarke Reaction (*) and the Staudinger
Reaction, at the end of it, the product is cleaved using hydrazine or
a base, leaving a stable cyclic molecule. FTP, name this method of
hydrolizing N-alkylphthalimides obtained from potassium pthalimide and
alkyl halides to synthesize primary amines. Leonard {Bloomfield} His
work Let’s Read, co-written with Clarence Barnhart, is considered an
educational classic, while his comparative studies of the Algonquin
family drew on his early work with Indo-European word formation. Other
works by this man, whose writings emphasized the physical act of
communication, include Menomini Texts and Tagalog Texts with
Grammatical Analysis. [*] His most famous work formulated a set of
“discovery procedures” that Chomsky would later take exception to. In
that 1933 book he argued against “philosophers” and “Grammarians” and
posited a mechanistic theory of semantics that saw meaning as a verbal
stimulus and response relationship. FTP identify this thinker best
known for the influential study Language. {Algeciras} Conference
(prompt on “Morocco Crisis”) Italy was represented by Emilio Visconti-
Venosta, while Henry White accompanied its star mediator to the table.
Precipitated by the ouster of Delcasse during the arrival of the
Tattenbach mission, Holstein nearly threatened to walk out numerous
times. Although many of the issues at stake would come back to haunt
the delegates five years later, [*] when the Panther was dispatched to
Agadir and brandished its weapons, At the time it seemed that Theodore
Rooselvelt had succeeded in quelling the rage that Wilhelm II felt
against the French for denying them access to a certain port, FTP,
identify this secret 1906 conference that was held in the namesake
Spanish town, which attempted to negotiate a dispute between France
and Germany during the first Morrocan crisis. Rosa {Bonheur} The Self-
portrait, found in Florence, is atypical of this artist’s work, which
is more accurately characterized by canvases like Plowing in the
Nivernais and the collections at a namesake museum in Fontainebleau.
Late in life this artist traveled to Scotland to paint Highland
scenes, much like her friend and chief rival Edwin Landseer. [*]
Studies for her most famous work, an enormous 1853 canvas, were made
while she was disguised as a man at its namesake location. The first
woman admitted to the French Legion of Honor, FTP, identify this
painter of animal scenes, a native of Bordeaux who produced The Horse
Fair. {Sufi}sm Works that emanate from this spiritual system include
the Conference of the Birds and the Masnavi, and they were nicknamed
“those who always weep” and ‘those who consider the world a hut of
sorrows”. Taking there name from the words for [*] ‘wool” and “cloak”
They believe that God desires to recognize beauty and that love is a
projection of God. Offshoots of it include the Muslim brotherhoods of
Senegal. The most famous philosopher from this movement is Mevlana,
also known as Rumi, and Omar Khayyam was also a follower. FTP name
this movement of Islamic mysticism whose initiates are called
Dervishes. Imre {Nagy} He ordered the restitution of the Smallholders,
Social Democratic, and the Peasants, parties as Chairman of the
Government of Ministers, and he used the newspaper “Szabad Nep” to
argue for the release of a Cardinal that had been imprisoned by his
nation’s previous leadership. Once Josef Mindszenty [*] had been set
free, he and his followers set out to reverse the policies that Matyas
Rakosi and Erno Gero had put in place. Seeking, in his own words, to
“democratize the country’s style of life yet stay true to socialism,”
he and his followers like Zoltan Szabo and Janos Kadar broke with the
Warsaw Pact, but when the Russian tanks came in he was deposed and
ultimately killed when Kadar betrayed him. FTP identify this leader
who tried to establish Hungary as a separate republic. Battle of
{White Mountain} This battle culminated an uprising that had, in the
past year, seen clashes at Sablat and Wisternitz. An event leading up
to it was the discovery of a desecrated religious painting in an
abandoned army encampment in Strakonice, which is said to have
motivated friar Domingo Ruzola to urge that this battle’s victorious
commander lead a charge on a [*] fortified position around the slopes
of Bila Hora, where 15,000 men had been deployed by Christian Anhalt.
Frederick V was driven out, earning him the nickname “The Winter
King,” after this 1620 victory for the Catholic League and Count
Tilly. FTP, name this battle near Prague that ended the Bohemian phase
of the Thirty Years War. Justin Smith {Morrill} A 1924 biography by
William Belmont Parker serves as the definitive account of the life of
this man, who chaired the Senate Finance Committee for nine different
terms. His interest in architecture manifested itself in his proposal
for the creation of Statuary Hall and his advocacy of construction for
the Washington Monument and Library of Congress. First elected to the
House as a Whig in [*] 1852, he switched to the Republican Party and
authored an 1861 tariff that called for higher rates than the Tariff
of Abominations. However, this Vermont politician’s claim to fame lies
in a pair of acts designed to encourage the pursuit of agricultural
studies. FTP, name this man who spurred the creation of numerous
universities with his eponymous Land Grant act. {The Bride Stripped
Bare by Her Bachelors, Even} (accept {The Large Glass} before it is
said) A collection of documents, The Green Box, published by the
artist eleven years after this work was finished helped to explain
some of its images. Small dots in the upper left are supposed to
represent “discharge, ” below this a little cart with runners is
connected to a “water mill.” Other parts of the composition include
the “sieve” made up of capillaries based on the artist’s own standard
of measurement, “canned chance.” [*] It is divided in two zones by a
lead wire that separates and subverts the love of the eager actor-
machines it depicts. When it was damaged accidentally in 1937 its
artist used it as an opportunity to embrace randomness and reassembled
it by incorporating the cracks. Also known as The Large Glass, FTP
identify this work, a Dadaist sculpture whose longish title refers to
a bizarre courtship, by Marcel Duchamp {metastases} (or {metastasis})
(prompt on {tumors} or {cancer}) Serine proteases, such as urokinase-
type plasminogen activator, and matrix metalloproteinases help them
form, as they clear paths into which these structures can grow. Their
patterns can be determined by the “stickiness” of endothelial cells,
(*) as some organs are more prone to have them form thanks to
different cell adhesion molecules. The protein “Twist” has recently
been found to play a large role in their formation, as it turns off
the gene for the protein E-cadherin, and thus allows malignant cells
to “slip away.” FTP, name these secondary growths formed from a
primary tumor somewhere else in the body, the main form in which
cancer spreads. {Edward II} Its most violent scene is precipitated by
an emasculating shave in dirty water and features the sudden
appearance of the character Lightborn, who is described as carrying
tragedy in his brows, and joins up with the agents Matrevis and Gurney
at Berkeley castle. [*] Although the young Spenser replaces him at the
court after he is exiled many of the opening sections of this work
belong to the French born Earl of Cornwall, who it seems has stolen
the title figure’s heart. Indeed, the flamboyant Gaveston has been so
successful, that the once faithful Isabella finds herself tempted by
young Mortimer’s proposals for regicide; an event that is memorably
staged with a hot poker. Yet all is set right at the end when a
namesake successor takes the throne. FTP identify this historical
drama about the “troublesome reign and lamentable death of” the title
figure, a work by Christopher Marlowe. {Black Skin, White Masks} The
conclusion ends with a quote from Marx’s “The Eighteenth Brumaire”
that dismisses the “poetry of the past,” an idea is taken up by the
author who ends this work with the statement “O my body, make of me
always a man who questions.” Including an analysis of Br’er Rabbit,
the work of Sir Alan Burns, and the ideas of Dominique Mannoni, it
argues that bilateral internal-ization or “affective erethism” spawns
the relationship between the title entities. [*] Its sections on
language and the “dependency complex” use Anti-Semite and Jew as a
model, but the majority of this treatise, including its discussion of
over-determined genitalia, is psychoanalytic. FTP identify this work
that contains such chapters as “The Man of Color and the White Woman”
and “The Fact of Blackness,” a work by Frantz Fanon. {Franz Josef
Land} The eastern most group is separated from the central group by
the Austrain Strait while the western group lies across the British
Strait. Discovered by Payer and Weyprecht, it falls administratively
into Arkhangelsk province. Its 191 constituents include [*] Zemlya
Aleksandry, home of a weather station, and Greem-Bell site of a Cold
War airfield. Curiously, geologic forces have caused the straits
between the islands to be deeper than the surrounding Barents Sea.
Many polar expeditions began on the northernmost island, Rudolf
Island, as it is behind only Ellesmere Island and Greenland in
proximity to the North Pole. FTP name this archipelago named for an
Austrian emperor that is the northernmost point in Russia. {Ariel}
poems One of them, dedicated to Ruth Fainlight, declares that “love is
a shadow” and that its speaker is “incapable of more knowledge,” but
finds a “strangle of branches” that “petrifies the will.” Another
takes place on a winter’s day in a hospital room and declares that the
title objects are “too red in the first place” and are opening “like
the mouth of some great African cat.” Those works, “Elm” and “Tulips,”
[*] complement the title poem, which describes the berries the speaker
eats as possessing “hooks.” Other famous images in this collection,
that shares its title with an essay about the effects of American
interference by Jose Rodo, include the “gray toe” of “a man in black
with a Meinkampf look” and a woman who “eats men like hair.” FTP
identify this posthumous collection of poems, with “Lady Lazarus” and
Daddy,” a work named for its author’s horse rather than a servant of
Prospero, written by Sylvia Plath. {The Language Instinct} It
discusses the myth of the “top-down” theory during an evaluation of
Raj Reddy’s “Hearsay” experiment and notes that Allan Bloom’s work on
the difference between Chinese and American comprehension of the same
stories can be favorably compared with the “Great Eskimo Vocabulary
Hoax.” Other chapters include “The Big Bang” which discusses Broca’s
research and Koko’s [*] mastery of ASL. Arguing for the existence of a
grammar gene, it begins with a consideration of The Descent of Man and
compares the title entity with web spinning in spiders and sonar in
bats. FTP identify this book subtitled, “How the Mind Creates
Language,” a work by Stephen Pinker. {Tontons Macoutes} Sometimes
called “dew breakers,” because they often worked in the early
mornings, they were purged after the great “uprooting.” One of their
strongholds was at Castle Dimanche and for many years they were
supervised by “Madame Max,” also known as Rosalie Adolphe, but they
became disillusioned with their creator’s decision to marry the
mulatto [*] Michele Bennet, which they saw as a betrayal of the
doctrine of noirisme. Under the patronage of interior minister Roger
Lafontant, they were officially known as the VSN or National Security
Volunteers, wore dark glasses, blue uniforms, and took their name from
a slang word for bogeymen. FTP identify these paramilitary death
squads that held power alongside “Papa Doc” Duvalier. {ylide}s
Polyethylene glycol, or PEG, is used to promote the formation of them,
and they can be incorporated into heterocyclic systems: for example,
the meso- ionic sydnone molecule contains an azomethine imine one. The
Corey-Fuchs reaction forms one (*) as an intermediate from carbon
tetrabromide, after which it is added to an aldehyde to form a
dibromoalkene. Sulfur-containing ones are called pi-sulfuranes, and
they are prepared by deprotonation of sulfonium salts by alkylation
with an alkyl halide. FTP, name these compounds which have two
adjacent atoms with full octets of electrons and formal positive and
negative charges, one of which can be generated from a phosphonium
salt and reacted with an aldehyde or ketone to form an alkene in the
Wittig Reaction. the {Mares of Diomedes} (prompt on Hercules’ Eighth
Labor) It was on the way to find them that the encounter with Admetus
and his wife Alcestis took place in Thessaly. Though eventually
released into the wilds of Tyrins, [*] by that time they had already
claimed the life of the hero’s young friend Abderus. Their abductor
had to defeat a whole army of Bistonians when unfastening these prizes
from the iron chains and halters used to keep them attached to a
bronze trough. This attracted lots of attention, but in the end they
were tamed after being fed their former master. FTP identify the
object of Heracles’ eighth labor, four man-eating horses named for a
King who shares his name with a great Greek warrior and friend of
Odysseus. (Modified) {Mercalli} Scale Some definitions of it divide
water tanks and windows into two types, and designate structures with
a Roman numeral one through six depending how advanced they are. Its
first ten values (*) roughly correspond to equivalent values on the
Rossi-Forel scale, and the Medvedev-Sponheuer-Karnik scale is also
based on it. Its final two levels, added in 1912 by Sieberg, indicate
that most masonry structures are knocked down, and that waves are
visible on the ground surface. Translated into English by Frank
Neumann and Harry Wood, FTP, name this scale which assigns a Roman
numeral in the range one through twelve corresponding to the intensity
of earthquakes. {Barnabas} (accept {Joses}) This native of Cyprus'
adventures with a more famous companion included his being mistaken
for Zeus, while his companion was mistaken for Hermes since he did
most of the talking. This occurred in Lystra, where they had traveled
from Iconium. When they returned home, they argued because this man
wanted his nephew to travel with them, although the nephew had
deserted them [*] in Pamphylia. Thus this man took John Mark as a new
companion and his former companion took Silas. FTP, name this prophet
of Antioch who, in the book of Acts, travels through Pisidia and the
central Asia Minor mostly listening to the Gospel as preached by his
companion Paul. {Shadows on the Rock} Mother Juschereau teaches the
protagonist’s daughter about saints and miracles, and the street
urchin Jacques Gaux becomes friends with her until he leaves to become
a sailor. The main character hears stories related by the hunchbacked,
cross-eyed Jules Blinker, (*) who was formerly an apprentice torturer
at Rouen and needs the protagonist to help him to heal his conscience.
The main character attempts to treat the illness of his ailing
benefactor, Count Frontenac, whose heart is returned to France in lead
box after he dies. Luckily, the woodsman Pierre Charron agrees to help
the main character with his work after marrying his daughter Cécile.
FTP, name this novel set in the waning years of the 17th century which
focuses on the Quebecois apothecary Euclide Auclair, a work by Willa
Cather. {Crito} A.D. Woozley’s book, Law and Obedience, discusses the
problem of reputation [*] in this philosophical work. It opens during
the annual voyage of the state vessel to Delos in commemoration of the
city’s deliverance from the Minotaur and mentions Simmias and Cebes as
persons willing to help bribe potential informers. Yet, all of the
arguments, including those that appeal to friendship, or to his
responsibilities as a parent, are refuted by the protagonist who notes
that to remain in a state, after having been reared under its laws,
is, in effect, to agree to abide by its laws. FTP identify this work
which stresses that the important thing is not to live, but to live
honorably, a Platonic dialogue that sees Socrates refuse the title
character’s help in escaping his execution. {A Midsummer Night’s
Dream} Overture and Incidental Music After the soft woodwind opening
of the first of these compositions, strings appear to scurry along at
an extreme pianissimo. That work also features the exotic ophicleide
which is used to color the bass line with a weirdly supernatural
shade, while a raucous fortissimo is used to depict the braying of an
ass. [*] The second piece was composed sixteen years after the first
at the request of Friedrich Wilhelm IV for a production in Potsdam.
That work was expanded to four movements, including an intermezzo,
which evokes the darker side of the forest, a scherzo, which seems to
depict fairies, and most famously a work that celebrates the triple
nuptials ending a certain play. FTP identify this pair of musical
compositions, the second one of which features “The Wedding March,”
works by Felix Mendelssohn were named for a Shakespeare play that
features Bottom and Puck. (positron) {annihilation} The Diffusion
Trapping Model is based on this process occurring at a certain rate,
thus fulfilling the Smoluchowski boundary condition. The PALS
technique (*) uses it to measure the free volume of semicrystalline
and amorphous solids. When it occurs, massless photons may be produced
in even quantities in order to conserve 4-momentum. Most often
observed between electrons and positrons in colliding-beam machines,
FTP, name this process, the opposite of pair production, in which a
particle and its antiparticle meet, converting all their mass to
energy. {Sonni Ali} Ber Some accounts say his death came by drowning
after the horse he was riding fell into the Koni River while returning
from a campaign against the Fulani. Abd ar Rahman as-Sadi was one of
many historians who condemned him after his death, citing his purge of
[*] scholars at the University of Sankore, and building his reputation
as a “Celebrated Infidel.” Notable military efforts he led include an
attack against Mossi raiders, a victory in Massina, and his successful
seven year siege of Jenne. Most significant was his 1468 ouster of the
Tuaregs, which allowed him to take Timbuktu. FTP, name this ruler who
expanded the kingdom of Gao into the Songhai empire. {Women in Love}
The snobby Halliday embarrasses one of the title characters at the
Café Pompadour by reading aloud from her friend’s letters about “the
flux of corruption.” The climax of the novel occurs in Innsbruck and
coincides with the introduction of a man who is described as a “small
dark skinned man” like “a troll.” Soon the shifty Herr Loerke [*] is
passing out schnapps and has convinced the proud industrialist, Gerald
Crich, to go tobogganing. He dies after crashing into a snowdrift and
the novel ends with Rupert Birkin blubbering to his partner from
Beldover about pure affection. FTP, name this work about the lives of
Ursula and Gudrun Brangwen’s travails with men, a sequel to The
Rainbow, written by D.H. Lawrence. {orthoclase} feldspar Some
varieties of it, such as perthite or cryptoperthite, are intergrown
with albite which is exsolved from pegmatites, granodiorites, or
granites. It follows only the Carlsbad, Manebach, and Baveno Laws of
twinning, (*) and as temperatures rise, sanidine is more likely to be
formed than it. Having the same chemical formula as microcline, it is
differentiated from that mineral due to its monoclinic crystal system.
Consisting of potassium aluminum silicate, it is formed at medium
temperatures after the continuous and discontinuous branches of Bowens
reaction series merge. FTP, name this variety of feldspar with
shardness 6, the counterpart of plagioclase. Josef {Albers} . He
created one of the first laminated wood chairs and his sandblasted
glass creations like Fugue were created during his time as a teacher
at the Bauhaus. After moving to Black Mountain College he began his
mathematical explorations in Variations on a theme. His large murals
grace the Time Life Building and he discussed his theories in
theoretical works like the posthumous Despite Straight Lines and the
treatise Interaction of Color. [*] His Structural Constellation began
his foray into understanding “the discrepancy between physical fact
and psychic effect” that would reach its apex with a series of
hundreds of canvases that bore lyrical subtitles like Distended,
Softly Spoken, and Curious and were inspired by a certain geometrical
shape FTP what German created these op-art masterpieces known as
Homage to the Square. {Jericho} Jesus' actions there in Luke's gospel
include telling the parable of the Talents and calling the publican
Zacchaeus out of a sycamore tree. In 1 Kings, Hiel the Bethelite makes
an unsuccesful attempt to rebuild its fortifications. Excavations
around Tall es-Sultan have revealed that as long ago as 8,000 B.C.,
there was a Neolithic settlement on this site with what is the oldest
[*] fortification wall ever discovered. Its story is told between that
of the Twelve Stones and that of the Sin of Achan in the book named
for the man who cursed anyone that tried to rebuild it. Two un-named
men from Shittim stayed in the house of the harlot Rahab in, FTP, what
city on the Jordan that was subsequently destroyed when Joshua's men
blew their trumpets? {Claisen} condensation The biosynthetic enzyme
thiolase I catalyzes this reaction in the biosynthesis of molecules
such as polyketides and fatty acids. This reaction is drawn to
completion by deprotonation of the active methylene (*) in the product
by the ethoxide. Generally conducted by strong basic reagents such as
NaOR, LDA, or MHMDS, its intermolecular version is called Dieckmann
condensation. The key to this reaction is an enolate reacting with
another molecule of the ester, forming an alkoxide intermediate which
subsequently undergoes elimination to form a ketone carbonyl group and
eventually, a beta- ketoester. FTP, name this nucleophilic acyl
substitution reaction that is the ester analogue of Aldol
condensation. {Leviathan} It notes that speech is the most noble of
inventions and concludes with a suggestion that “the darkness” of vain
philosophy can be avoided by analyzing language. This work also posits
that motion is the universal cause of behavior and introduces its
author’s “Theory of Obligation.” [*] Its later sections test the
claims of scripture, which is usually used to obfuscate the truth, by
asking “Who benefits?” and its 27th chapter compares the papacy with
the kingdom of the fairies. This treatise discusses the Laws of Nature
or “articles of peace” to argue for the superiority of the monarchy.
Subtitled “or the Matter, Form, and Power of a Commonwealth,
Ecclesiastical and Civil,” FTP identify this work which describes the
life of man as “solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short,” a work by
Thomas Hobbes. {Fences} We learn that the main character of this work
sired an illegitimate daughter named Raynell with Alberta. Lyons comes
around on Fridays to borrow money, but after breaking up with Bonnie
he goes to jail for check fraud. Jim Bono (*) claims that the main
character, a fellow garbage-man, has “some Uncle Remus” in his blood.
The central character warns his son not to “strike out,” alluding to
the racial prejudice he experienced as a skilled baseball player
during the 1950s. This occurs after Cory breaks up a fight with Rose,
who constantly nags the main character to finish constructing a
titular structure. FTP, name this play in which the death of Troy
finalizes the collapse of the African-American Maxson family, a work
by August Wilson. {Calchas} Supposedly buried at Notium, there are two
conflicting stories about his death. In one tale he dies from laughing
too much after tasting some wine from vines he had planted himself, in
the other this son of Thestor incorrectly guesses the number of
piglets in the womb of a pregnant sow. When his rival Mopsus [*]
proves him incorrect he dies of ashamed of his once formidable powers.
Earlier in his life this priest of Artemis had seen a snake at an
altar in Aulis and divined that the conflict he was involved in would
take nine years. And it was on his advice that Chryseis was returned
to her father and Iphigenia sacrificed by Agamemnon. FTP identify this
Greek seer who predicted that Troy would not fall without the help of
Achilles and Philoctetes. {The Theory of Business Enterprise}
Featuring a long discussion of the public’s withdrawal from animism
and superstition and a rejection of natural law, many of its ideas,
especially “the conscientious withdrawal of efficiency” and the
capitalist’s attempts to “capture” the government’s regulatory
apparatus,” were later expanded in its author’s Engineers and the
Price System. [*] By juxtaposing “ceremony” with “technology,” it
hypothesized that society was turning into a machine that produced
goods, and that, contrary to popular belief, the successful
entrepreneur sought to sabotage this consistent production in order to
hoard the remaining goods and make money during the attendant
confusion. FTP identify this economic work which explains how the
businessman operates, a study by Thorstein Veblen. Francisco Vasquez
de {Coronado} When he left his post as governor of New Galicia, the
indigenous population waged the Mixton War against his replacement
governor, Cristobal de Onate. His encounter with the Pecos tribe
introduced him to a Pawnee captive nicknamed “The [*] Turk,” whose
stories tricked him into a fruitless search for the supposedly wealthy
Quivira tribe. Serving the viceroy Antonio Mendoza, he was initially
inspired by the stories of Cabeza de Vaca, and retraced Cabeza’s steps
to find the Zuni tribe as part of his quest for the legendary Seven
Cities of Cibola. Finally retiring in Mexico after traveling as far as
present-day Kansas, this is, FTP, which Spanish conquistador whose
failed quest for gold drove him to lead the first extensive
exploration of the American southwest? {Children’s Corner} The lively
last section quotes Tristan und Isolde, while another, the delicious
The snow is dancing, is more tranquil. Its composer attempted to give
English names to all the parts of this work, leading to some odd
titles including a section dedicated to a sleeping elephant that was
published as Jimbo’s Lullaby [*]. Notable for its mocking of Muzio
Clementi’s piano studies in Doctor Gradus ad Parnassum, the most
popular of its six pieces remain the Serenade for the Doll and
Gollywog’s Cakewalk. Inspired by the composer’s governess and
dedicated to his “Chou Chou,” FTP identify this suite for piano, that
was written to amuse Claude Debussy’s four year old daughter. {Gobi}
Desert Alternative names for it are sha-mo and han-hal and the
greatest cultural sites in this region are the series of Buddhist
cave-temple complexes including the Cave of the Thousand Buddhas. Also
the source of the first dinosaur eggs discovered, some of its sections
are known as the Ka-shun, Dzungarian, and the Ala Shan. It’s borders
are the  [*] Tien Shan to the southeast, the Tibetan Plateau to the
southwest, and the northern edge is the Altai Mountains. It contains
very little sand and the first European accounts of the area were
given by Marco Polo as the desert was partially traversed by the Silk
road.  FTP name this desert of central asia that covers parts of both
China and Mongolia. {A Valediction Forbidding Mourning} The later work
with this name ends with the line “To do something very common in my
own way” and features the image of a poster on a bus that tells the
speaker “my bleeding is under control.” It begins “My swirling wants.
Your frozen lips” and in moment of fun with the author of the original
notes “the grammar turned and attacked me.” Adrienne Rich’s language
contrasts acutely with that of the first one which asserts that “when
the other far doth roam” the love will still be there. That version,
written for the author’s wife before leaving for a trip to the
continent, [*] begins with the lines “As virtuous men pass mildly
away” and encourages its addressee to make no noise or shed no tears.
FTP identify these poems, the more famous of which compares the souls
of two lovers as two “stiff twin compasses,” and was written by John
Donne. {M}ajor {H}istocompatibility {C}omplex (prompt on {H-2} or
{H}uman {L}eukocyte {A} before mentioned) Its class II region contains
the LMP and the TAP genes, which produce parts or protein-cleaving
proteosomes. Discovered in the 1940s by George Snell, its function was
not elucidated until 1975, when Zinkernagel and Doherty (*) found that
the molecules assocated with it interacted with immune cells. Most
notably, its class I region codes for molecules that present peptide
chains to cytotoxic T-cells, allowing them to recognize what to
attack. Known as H-2 in mice, where it is located on chromosome 17,
and Human Leukocyte A in humans, it contains the most polymorphic loci
found in humans. FTP, name this set of genes which control
immunological self and non-self recognition, thus invoking rapid
rejection of foreign tissues. Donald {Davidson} As an undergraduate at
Harvard he played the lead in a production of The Birds that featured
his friend Leonard Bernstein on piano. His dissertation was on Plato’s
Philebus, though he had yet to coin the terms that he would deploy in
his many landmark essays. These included “anomalous monism,” which
argued that the mind can not be reduced to physical processes, as well
as “triangulation,” [*] which described the interplay between the
individual, other people, and the nonhuman. But he may be most famous
for his idea that it was communication with others that defines
reality. FTP idenitify this long time professor at Berkeley, whose
works were collected in a battery of essay collections such as
Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation. Lewis {Cass} Serving as a
brigadier general in the War of 1812, he also led an expedition that
erroneosly concluded what the source of the Mississippi River is. He
also served as minister to France from 1836 to 1842 and lead the
Senate bloc demanding “reannexation” during the “54-40 or fight”
issue. In the [*] cabinet he was preceeded by William L. Marcy as
Secretary of State and John Henry Eaton as Secretary of War. It was in
that office that he directed the Black Hawk and Seminole Wars. As a
Michigan Senator he championed the doctrine of Popular Sovreignty. FTP
name this man who lost the 1848 presidential election and may have
been the first person about whom it was said “They’re not booing,
they’re saying Lew.” Robert {Ingersoll} The Dresden Edition of his
works, which includes such titles as “The Limits of Toleration” and
“Eight Hours Must Come,” discusses the incredulity he aroused when he
went to visit Pere Lachaise and only wanted to see Comte’s tomb. After
his service in the 11th Illinois regiment, which ended when he was
captured by Nathan Bedford Forrest, he represented the railroads.
Eventually he followed his brother, Ebon Clark, [*] a Congressman, to
Washington where he began making the lecture circuit with discussions
of “Creed.” But his most famous speech began, “Massachusetts may be
satisfied with the loyalty of Benjamin Bristow” and went on to laud
the Republican Party nominee of the centennial year with more and more
praise, for a “plumed knight” named James G. Blaine. FTP identify this
man best known for his discussions of religion in works like The Gods
and Some Mistakes of Moses, an orator remembered as “The Great
Agnostic.” Whittaker-{Nyquist-}Kotelnikov-{Shannon sampling} theorem
It can be used to show that a nontrivial function cannot have both
finite duration and finite bandwidth. Its proof uses Fourier transform
of the summation from negative to positive infinity of the Dirac comb
multiplied (*) by a continuous signal. It must be obeyed even one uses
a device such as a Butterworth or Wiener filter, as there will still
exist energy outside of the filtered bandwidth. FTP, name this
important theorem in information theory which states that when
converting a signal from analog to digital, a namesake frequency must
be greater than twice the bandwidth of the input signal to avoid
information loss. The {Sheep Well} (accept {Fuenteovejuna}) At one
point, Barrildo argues with Mingo about the nature of love, but the
latter is eventually flayed alive. The antagonist’s henchmen Ortuño
and Esteban stumble and bumble in rounding up peasant girls for their
master. (*) One subplot involves Rodrigo Girón leading the Order of
Calatrava in an attack against Ciudad Real, though he is eventually
pardoned. Frondoso saves a beautiful girl with his crossbow, after
which she promises to marry him, but he is later sentenced to death.
The antagonist meets his match when the prettiest girl in the village,
Laurencia, escapes from his citadel and incites the villagers to rise
up, after which King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella pardon them for his
execution. Commander Fernan Gomez de Guzman gets his comeuppance in,
FTP, what play by Lope de Vega? Leon {Walras} His later works include
Economics and Engineering and two appendixes to his magnum opus
usually titled Studies in Social Economics and Studies in Applied
Economics. In these works he argued for a “progressive theory of
capital” and tried to account for the inconsistencies of the Quantity
Theory with his idea of “desired cash balance.” [*] Out of fashion for
a time, his ideas were resurrected in The Theory of Social Economy by
Gustav Cassel who now shares credit for his namesake model of the
demand for factors versus the demand for goods. His American followers
included Henry Moore and Irving Fisher, but he is better known for his
mentorship of Enrico Barone and the author of Mind and Society. FTP
identify this teacher of Vilfredo Pareto, the father of general
equilibrium theory and founder of the Lausanne School of Economics.
{radiation pressure} (accept “light” for “radiation”) So-called
“zodiacal light” is caused by particles which are roughly in
equilibrium from the Poynting-Robertson effect, the Yarkovsky Effect,
and this. First measured by E.F. Nichols and G.F. Hull in 1903, P.N.
Lebedev (*) used a set of flat metallic sheets in vacuum to prove its
existence experimentally. For relativistic particles, it is equal to
equal to one-third times the temperature to the fourth times the
radiation constant, though it can also be calculated as equal to
energy flux divided by the speed of light. FTP, name this phenomenon
which causes comets’ tails to go away from the sun, the force per unit
area exerted by electromagnetic radiation. Emilio {Aguinaldo} He spent
several months in Bilibid Prison on charges of making Anti-American
radio broadcasts and collaborating with Japanese occupiers, though he
was pardoned and went on to serve two terms in the Council of State.
1957 saw the publication of his book A Second Look at America, which
was co-written with Vicente [*] Pacis. His early career took a long
hiatus after his capture at Palanan by Frederick Funston, and he only
resurfaced in 1935 to run for president of the newly established
commonwealth, losing badly to Manuel Quezon. FTP, name this man who
became president of the Malolos Republic in 1899 and built a career
leading opposition to American involvement in the Philippines. {Sebek}
or {Sobek} The Book of the Dead identifies him as the lord of Ombos
when his name and powers are combined with those of Ra. Paradoxically,
he has also been identified with Horus even though many stories tell
how Set hid himself in this God’s body to escape punishment. Often
depicted in art with a solar disk and a rearing cobra on his head, he
is sometimes called the brother of Apep, [*] since he too was born to
the goddess Neith. Followers of this deity in the province of Fayum
sought to test their courage by drinking from the same pool that
housed his earthly incarnation, Petsuchos. FTP identify this god who
represented the skill and strength of the pharaoh in battle and was
primarily worshipped at Crocodilopolis. {Cannizarro} Reaction It lacks
H-D exchange at the alpha position in ambient liquid water, and after
dichloromethane hydrolizes in high-temperature water, it produces
formate and methanol. The stoichiometric alkylation of certain
compounds via their metal enolates is frowned upon because of the
enolates’ propensity to undergo aldol condensation, the Tishchenko
reaction, (*) and this reaction. It cannot occur with compounds that
have an alpha hydrogen, and it involves either a rapid proton transfer
from a hydride ion or the formation of an acid salt when an alkoxide
ion gets a proton from the solvent. Often used for alpha-keto
aldehydes, its “crossed” variety uses formaldehyde as a reducing
agent. FTP, name this reaction in which a non-enolizable aldehyde is
disproportionated into an alcohol and a carboxylic acid, named after a
peer of Avogadro. {In Memory of W.B. Yeats} The 1966 edition of the
author’s Collected Shorter Poems excised the three stanzas that
originally ended this work and drew parallels between its subject’s
politics and that of men like Paul Claudel and Rudyard Kipling. Lines
like “In the nightmare of the dark/ All the dogs of Europe bark,”
bemoans the coming of another war and it urges the title figure to
“follow poet, [*] follow right” and persuade us to rejoice, though “he
is scattered among a hundred cities.” It has no subtitle but the year
in which its subject died, 1939, and it begins “In the dead of winter/
the brooks were frozen, the airports almost deserted,” FTP identify
this elegy that laments the author of volumes like The Tower, The
Winding Stair, and Leda and the Swan, a work by W.H. Auden. Battle of
{Inkerman} The site was a key point of the northeastern angle of the
plateau of the Chersonese; it commands the road ascending the plateau
by Cathcart’s ravine. Confusion over whose “left” was meant in an
order led to mistakes that hindered Pauloff’s and [*] Soimonoff’s
force. Gortschakoff’s flaccid false attack was probably the biggest
mistake on the losing side. As was a theme for the larger war, poor
British leadership, this time under by Lord Raglan, was partially
ameliorated by English bravery. The battle was eventually won by a
counter-offensive by Bosquet over the forces of Menshikov. FTP name
this battle of the Crimean War that was the last of three battles
preceding the siege of Sebastopol. "{Mr. Big}" or "{John}" While
chasing a woman that he is having an affair with, his ex-wife Natasha,
who worked for Ralph Lauren, breaks a tooth falling down a flight of
stairs.  He owns a Jag, but is rarely seen driving it, as his trusty
companion Raul is usually in charge of the wheel. [*]  Well known for
enjoying a good cigar and a nice steak, this quintessential "New
Yorker," who likes to exclaim “abso-fucking-lutely,” makes a sudden
move to Napa, buys a vineyard, and in the process breaks a certain
columnist’s heart. FTP identify this character, who goes to find his
true love in Paris during the finale of HBO's "Sex and The City,"
Carrie’s on-again, off-again beau played by Christopher Noth. {PEP
Carboxylase} (accept {Phosphoenol Pyruvate Carboxylase}) Experiments
have shown that serine residue in the carboxyterminal part of this
enzyme has been conserved evolutionarily and accounts for some of the
water-saving characteristics of the plants (*) in which it is highly
concentrated. Restricted to the mesophyll, where it is closer to the
leaf surface, its activity is boosted by the presence of nitrate and
it catalyzes a reaction which reduces oxaloacetate to malic acid.
Unlike its analog, Rubisco, it has an extremely high affinity for CO2
and cannot fix oxygen. Thus, plants that utilize this enzyme have less
photorespiratory carbon loss. FTP, name this plant enzyme that is used
to fix carbon in CAM and C4 plants. {The Incoherence of the
Incoherence} or {Tahafut al-Tahafut} Its discussion of plurality is
illustrated by an enumeration of various immaterial intelligences,
while its argument that an individual’s soul is part of a single
universal soul was critiqued by Aquinas in his “On the Unity of the
Intellect Against” [*] its author’s followers. It tackles the
misconception that a “First Cause” is superfluous, by noting that a
series of causes must depend upon a cause necessary in itself, from
which it must follow that God, as the first cause, exists. Its author
does not articulate many of the points he would later make in his On
the Harmony of the Religion and Philosophy, rather he attempts to
specifically respond to Al Ghazali’s critique. FTP identify this work
by Averroes which took its title from the work it sought to debunk,
The Incoherence of the Philosophers. Lorenzo {Lotto} The Met holds one
of this painter’s few mythological scenes, Venus and Cupid. He ended
his life at the Monastery of Santa Casa at Loreto where, according to
Vasari, he was happy and worked on his last works with a trembling
hand. This marked the end of a journey that saw him being rejected,
first by Julius II during a stint in Rome, and then by Titian’s circle
on his return home. His successes include The Story of St. Barbara,
painted in Bergamo, and The Madonna and Child with St. John and St.
Peter, but it was for his portraiture, [*] that always had a sort of
strangeness associated with it, for which he is best known. FTP
identify this Venetian painter of such works as Portrait of a Young
Man and Portrait of Andrea Odoni. {Our Mutual Friend} Mr. Sloppy is a
foundling taken in by Betty Higden, and Mrs. Sprodgkin constantly
talks about biblical characters begetting each other. Fanny Cleaver
makes dolls’ dresses and goes by the name Jenny Wren, [*] and the
pompous schoolmaster Bradley Headstone attempts to kill Eugene
Wrayburn. At one point in this novel, the main character gets an
affidavit from Rogue Riderhood proclaiming that the latter gave false
information implicating Gaffer Hexam in a murder. Nicodemus Boffin
hires a corrupt man to read for him after he inherits the title
character’s fortune, but Wegg’s blackmail plans are foiled and he is
thrown onto a garbage wagon when a secret will is produced. FTP, name
this work whose protagonist, John Harmon, takes the aliases Julius
Handford and John Rokesmith, in order to get to his love Bella Wilfer,
the last completed novel of Charles Dickens. {Die Fledermauss} or The
{Bat} A Hungarian czardas and the counting song, “One, Two, Three,”
are parts occasionally performed on their own. Other key moments
include the “Champagne Song” and the appearance of a drunk prison
guard named Frosch who opens the third act with a comic monologue
before a coffee machine explodes. The action is set in motion by an
earnest suitor singing a Verdi tune, that character, an Italian tenor
named Alfred, is dragged off to jail when he is mistaken for Falke’s
[*] friend who has decided to attend a ball without his wife knowing.
At the dance Ida’s sister Adele steals the show with the operatic
laughter of the song “Mein Herr Marquis, ” and everyone gets to hear
about the origins of the work’s title when Eisenstein reveals how he
dropped his costumed friend off in public and everyone thought he
looked like a certain flying animal. FTP identify this opera about the
adventures of Rosalinde and the rest of Vienna’s idle rich, a work by
Johann Strauss. {Josiah} This man became king at age eight and died in
battle thirty-one years later. That battle came about because the
Pharoah Necho II took an expansionist stance, causing this monarch to
ally himself with Assyria. His death at Hadadrimmon fulfiled the
prophecy of Huldah that he would die before his kingdom went to its
final, deserved ruin. [*] The most important event of his reign took
place after he put Shaphan in charge of a construction project, in the
course of which Hilkiah the priest made an important discovery. FTP,
name this son of Amon who "did that which was right in the sight of
the Lord and walked in all the way of David his father," the King of
Judah during whose reign the Book of the Law, Moses' autograph copy of
the Pentateuch, was rediscovered in the Temple. {Hindu Kush} The first
known general descriptions of them is found in the ancient records of
the Chinese Buddhist monk Xuanzang. The valleys of the Konar and
Gilgit rivers are divided by the Karambar pass, [*] which is generally
accepted as their boundary in the east and other rivers flowing from
it include the Helmand River and the Hari Rud. It’s highest peak is
Mount Tirich Mi and this system was important for transportation
before the construction of the Salang road. It buttresses the Pamir
range and its western extremity is believed by geologists to be the
Iranian border. FTP name this mountain system that divides the valley
of the Amu Darya from the Indus River valley and is home to the Khyber
Pass. {Fenian} Society or {Clan Na Gael} Their Secretary for War was
T.W. Sweeny and some of them were involved in Francis Millen’s so-
called “Jubilee Plot,” which involved blowing up Westminster Abbey.
Many of its members were apprehended by Ulysses S. Grant after they
had avoided the gun boat USS Michigan [*] and had an intense, but
confused battle, with Colonel Alfred Booker’s detachment at Ridgeway.
Some of them later outfitted an old Civil War boat, renamed it Erin’s
Hope, and tried to cross the Atlantic Ocean in it. Members simply
called it “the Brotherhood” and its overseas leadership was headed up
under James Stephens, but the original in the U.S. was founded by John
O’Mahoney. FTP identify this Irish Organization whom John O’Neil led
on raids into Canada in the 1860s. {Epitaph of a Small Winner}
({Memorias Postumas de Bras Cubas} or The {Posthumous Memories of Bras
Cubas}) The protagonist’s earliest memory is that of receiving a small
sword commemorating the defeat of Napoleon. Told in 160 short chapters
it features the shady Quincas Borba who is reduced to begging and
talks of his “philosophy of misery” before stealing the main
character’s watch. (*) He later amasses a large fortune and assumes
the Panglossian philosophy of “humanitism.” The greedy Marcella, who
pretends to be poor but is actually a goldsmith, is the main
character’s first mistress. His second mistress, Virgilia, is married
to Lobo Neves, but returns to Rio de Janeiro to visit the main
character on his deathbed which is where the story begins, FTP, name
this novel which follows the life of its already dead, main character
Braz Cubas, a novel of Joaquim Machado de Assis. The {Return of the
Native} Leslie Stephen rejected an early version of this novel for
Cornhill as it seemed to risqué for a family periodical, so the author
had it published in Belgravia with each installment accompanied by an
Arthur Hopkins illustration. The author’s own visual contribution was
a map of the setting that at first included the homes of Susan Nunsuch
and the yokels Christian [*] and Grandfather Cantle. Other locations
included the Quiet Woman Inn, whose owner attempts to flee with the
resident of Mistover Knapp at the end. However, Egdon Heath proves
inescapable for Damon Wildeve and Eustacia Vye, the wife of the title
character Clym Yeobright in, FTP, what Thomas Hardy novel?
{hemoglobin} In one variety, changes in its tertiary structure
propagate to the FG segment and the C helix as predicted by the Perutz
model. The earliest set of this molecule to develop in humans is known
as Gower I, and its activity can be measured with the Adair
formulation. Vernon Ingram used DNA fingerprinting (*) to
differentiate between its S and A types, though both contain alpha
chains of 141 amino acids and beta chains of 146 amino acids. Most of
its non-protein portions are broken down into bilirubin, and all types
of it are tetramers consisting of different combinations of seven
distinct polypeptide chains. One of the porphyrin compounds, its S
variety is mutated in sickle-cell anemia. FTP, name this iron-
containing pigment of the red blood cells which carries oxygen in the
blood stream. Elihu {Root} His father was a professor of mathematics
and as a result, his father and brother were known as “Cube” and
“Square.” While on a tour of South America he persuaded Latin-American
states to participate in the Second Hague Peace Conference. Almost 15
years later, from 1920-21, he served on the League of Nations’
commission of jurists, five years after he ended his single term as a
Republican senator [*] from New York. He had already worked as
McKinley’s secretary of war, but his best-known work came in another
cabinet post. For his settlement of the American-British conflict over
North Atlantic fisheries he won the 1912 Nobel in Peace. FTP, name
this secretary of state to Teddy Roosevelt who also reached an accord
with Japanese foreign minister Takahira. {Spice World} John Cleese was
initially offered the role of Mr. Step, which Michael Barrymore filled
after Cleese’s refusal. George Wendt makes an appearance as a movie
producer pitching some ideas and Roger Moore offers up a series of
bizarre quotes. [*] The villain is Kevin McMaxford who wants to break
up the central group, about whom Alan Cumming’s Piers Cuthbertson-
Smythe is filming a documentary. Perhaps the saddest role is that of
Meat Loaf as the driver of a double-decker tour bus. FTP, name this
1997 movie starring Melanie Chisholm, Melanie Brown, Emma Bunton, Geri
Halliwell, and Victoria Beckham. the {Curetes} They told Minos that he
could save Glaucus by finding any man who could devise the aptest
simile for a recently born calf changing color. All of them were the
sons of the five daughters of Hecaterus and they were finally
destroyed for stealing Epaphus, the son of Io, and taking Hera’s side
[*] against their former charge. Taking their name from the Greek for
“young man” they were associated with the nymphs of Mt. Ida and were
best known for the time they danced in front of a cave entrance,
loudly clashing their spears together, in order to hide an infant’s
cries from the ears of his paranoid father Cronos. FTP identify these
minor Cretan Gods who helped to look after a baby Zeus. The {Ox-Bow
Incident} It is during a gathering at Canby’s that the news that
drives the action of this novel arrives. The ending features two
suicides, one of which is committed by Gerald and the other by his
father. Old Davies proves to be the greatest voice of reason, [*] and
even after he reads a letter written by the falsely accused Martin, he
is unable to prevent the actions of Tetley, who is convinced of
Martin’s guilt. All of these events take place at Bridger’s Wells and
are narrated by Art Croft. FTP, name this novel about the lynching of
three innocent men, a work by Walter van Tilberg Clark. {epoxide}s
[accept {oxirane}s or {alkylene oxide}s] The carcinogenic properties
of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons are caused by the reaction of
these compounds with DNA. Some electrophilic reagents, such as boron
trifluoride etherate, rearrange them to form carbonyl-containing
compounds. The nucleophilic reagent triphenylphosphine forms an olefin
(*) when reacted with them, and the reaction of sodium azide with one
of them forms a beta-azide alcohol. Their industrial preparation
involves the addition of a cholorhydrin to an alkene and then
treatment with a base to remove hydrochloric acid. They are most
commonly made by acting a peroxyacid upon an alkene, an action that
causes the transfer of an oxygen atom and the creation of 60 degree
bond angles, putting these molecules under strain. FTP, identify these
cyclic ethers with a three-membered ring. {Barons’ War} (accept early
buzz of “Simon de Montfort’s War or Revolt, or equivalent”) At one of
this war’s pivotal early engagements Richard of Cornwall, the king of
Germany, was captured. It ended partially due to an uprising of an
indigenous group known as the “Marchers” and began due to
dissatisfaction with the king showing preference to his Poitevin,
Savoyard, and Lusignan relatives. [*] The eventual losers had early
success at Lewes, however, defeat at Evesham, where Simon de Montfort
was killed, saw an end to this conflict. FTP, identify this war that
began when the Provisions of Oxford were ignored by Henry III, a 13th-
century conflict named for the rank of many of the nobles who
revolted. A {Chaste Maid in Cheapside} One marriage that ends this
play is that of a Welsh lady who owns nineteen mountains to young
student Tim. Another is that of the title character, whose mother
Maudlin had initially hoped for a different son-in-law. That son-in-
law had been siphoning off the wealth of impotent Sir Oliver and his
wife Lady Kix, but he is done in by a pregnancy cure offered up by
Touchwood Senior. [*] As a result, Sir Walter Whorehound loses the
hand of Moll Yellowhammer, the ostensible title character. FTP, name
this Thomas Middleton comedy set mostly in the titular London
neighborhood. {Commentaries} on the Gallic Wars or De {Bello Gallico}
Its author defies believability in his description of an elk with no
joints and an ox with a horn growing out of the middle of his head,
two of the fantastic animals described in the Hyrcanian Forests. Only
the first section of Book I and the second section of Book VI are
about provincial matters. The supplementary books are believed to have
been written by Aulus Hirtius, [*] but more interesting are earlier
descriptions of such mean as Divitiacus and Ariovistus. FTP, name this
work whose concluding sections include accounts of the siege of Alesia
and the capitulation of Vercingetorix, a work by Julius Caesar. law of
{charge conservation} One result of it is that in photoexcitation of
gas molecules, the number of trapped electrons must be equal to the
number of trapped holes after irradiation in vacuo, and a finite value
for the mean lifetime of the electron (*) would cause its breakdown.
This law is the result when Noether’s theorem is applied to the
invariance of a complex quantum field under phase shifts. A local
statement of it is that the partial derivative of rho with respect to
time equals minus the gradient of the current density. Kirchoff’s
junction rule is also a formulation of this law. FTP, what law states
that the net number of coulombs in a closed system is constant?
{Discipline and Punish} Part two contrasts the “generalized way”
versus “the gentle way,” while chapter three opens with a
consideration of Frederick II’s soldiers. Its author chooses to end
with the assertion that the system was complete in 1840 with the
opening of Mettray, [*] and that this moment saw the emergence of what
he terms “the carceral.” It cites Eric Hobswam’s work on bandits
during the discussion of post-revolutionary criminality and discusses
the festival atmosphere of the traveling chain gang, but it is most
famous for the sections “Torture,” “The spectacle of the scaffold,”
and “Panopticism,” FTP, identify this work subtitled “The Birth of the
Prison” by Michel Foucault. “{Bells for John Whiteside’s Daughter}”
The poet wrote that this poem’s third and fourth quatrains could be
played for comedy, specifically in the images of the title character,
who “with rod” made the lazy geese scuttle “from their noon apple-
dreams.” The second stanza says of the title character, “Her wars were
bruited in our high window,” [*] while the poem opens by remarking
“There was such speed in her little body, / And such lightness in her
footfall.” Robert Penn Warren claimed that the poem’s effect was
embodied in the words astonishes and vexed in a study of the poet,
Penn Warren’s former teacher. FTP, name this elegy written on the
death of a neighbor’s youngest girl, a poem by John Crowe Ransom.
George Herbert {Mead} He associated himself with the “settlement
house” movement and his early work, like the essay “Social Psychology
as Counterpart to Physiological Psychology,” tried to conceptualize an
alternative to imitative learning and argued for a developed self. His
most famous idea, best encapsulated in the phrase “the conversation of
gestures,” [*] was popularized by his disciple Herbert Blumer and
argued that people give meaning to the world and work out these
meanings through interpersonal contact. FTP identify this social
scientist whose works like Mind, Self, and Society gave rise to the
doctrine of “symbolic interactionism.” {Dahomey} Its first ruler is
acknowledged to be Gangnihessou [gung-NEE-hess-soo], though it was
after his rule that its kings adopted food items that served as
symbols and word puzzles of their names. Its penultimate king Glele
[glee-LAY], was forced to curb his use of slaves, and his son, the
last king Behanzin, [*] finally succumbed to European hegemony. This
empire’s origins lie in the coastal kingdom of Allada, from which it
separated and then conquered under the rule of Agaja, who employed
female shock-troops or Amazons. FTP, identify this west-African
kingdom, whose name briefly survived as the original name of Benin.
{logos} The Eastern Orthodox theologian Apostolos Makrakis founded a
school on Crete named after this, and it appears in Stoicism as a term
identifying the principle of cosmic reason [*] which made the universe
accessible to humanity. Philo Judaeus preferred its masculine gender
to the feminine “Sophia,” or “Wisdom” of Jewish thought. Philo’s
understanding of the term can be explained by a literal reading of the
Book of Genesis, in which God’s first act was to speak, thus creating
this. Christians would subsequently use it to identify Jesus in his
prehuman existence, as delineated in the Gospel According to John.
FTP, identify this term, meaning Greek for “word.” Carl {Nielsen} This
author of the books Living Music and My Childhood composed four string
quartets and his works for flute include The Fog is Lifting and The
Children are Playing. Originally a violinist, he is less well known
for piano compositions, like Chaconne and Lucifer Suite, than for his
tone poems such as Pan and Syrinx and Helios. [*] His attempts at
opera include Maskarade and Saul and David, while his rustic home
inspired the choral Springtime in Funen, but this student of Gade’s
fame rests on a sequence of works that bear such nicknames as “the
Expansive,” “the Four Temperaments,” and “the Simple.” FTP identify
this Danish composer of six symphonies including his fourth, “The
Inextinguishable.” Pavel Ivanovitch {Chichikov} He is fond of wearing
a Tula-made pin shaped like a bronze pistol to fasten his shirtfronts.
About halfway through the novel it is revealed that he embarked on his
current journey [*] after gleaning some information about the Trustee
Committee. He claims to have some land in Khersom and is at one point
mistaken for the legendary Captain Kopeykin. A loan from Kostanzhoglo
and a tip from Klobueff prove his undoing as he is caught forging an
old lady’s will. By that point he had already visited the homes of
Maniloff, Sobakevitch, and Plyushkin and procured the rights to their
expired serfs. FTP, name this swindling central character of Gogol’s
Dead Souls. {Griswold v. Connecticut} Prior to this decision, the
statute in question had been challenged twice, in Tileston v. Ullman
and Poe v. Ullman. Seven years after this decision, its scope was
expanded in a case that concerned a man who engaged in a controversial
practice after giving a lecture at Boston University. [*] That case,
Eisenstadt v. Baird, involved a Massachusetts law that forbade
distributing an item to a certain class of people. The law under
dispute in this case was a state statute of 1879 which even the
dissenting justices, Hugo Black and Potter Stewart, agreed was
“uncommonly silly.” The majority opinion written by William Douglas
refers to rights that are implicit in the Constitution, while other
justices relied on a broad interpretation of the 14th Amendment and
its “due process” clause to find that there was a protected “right to
privacy.” FTP, name this 1965 decision which invalidated a statute
forbidding the sale of contraceptives to married persons. Prosper
{Merimée} One of his last stories depicts a creature from Lithuania
who is half- bear, half-man. In another, a statue of Venus seems to
have killed the protagonist and driven his fiancée insane. His early
works include plays about the Jacquerie and the family of Carvajal,
the latter of which is a retelling of The Cenci, while he wrote about
the Saint Bartholomew’s Day Massacre in his novel [*] Chronicle of the
Reign of Charles IX. His collection Mosaic includes a story about a
revolt on a slave ship, “Tamango,” and another about a Corsican youth
who is killed by his own father, “Mateo Falcone,” though he is better
known for a novella about a woman who prods her brother Orso Antonio
to avenge their father. In addition to “Columba,” he wrote an tale in
which an archaeologist listens to the story of a bandit who killed the
woman he loved. FTP, name this French author of The Theater of Clara
Gazul and a work about Don José and his gypsy lover, Carmen.
{Vertumnus} This figure appears as an old man sitting to the left of a
bored woman in a painting by Goveart Flinck. He appears as an old man
sitting on a wicker basket talking to a woman in a red dress in a
painting by Jan Tengnagel. He appears nude with his left arm extended
above his head in a fresco in the Villa Medici painted by Pontormo. He
appears with the face of an old man, the hands and feet of a young
man, a staff and a bonnet in a painting by Francesco Melzi. The most
famous, and strangest, depiction of him appears in a 1591 work in
which the subject has peapods for eyebrows and a pear for a nose. [*]
In that painting, Emperor Rudolf II was depicted as this god by
Giuseppe Arcimboldo. FTP, name this Roman deity of fruit trees,
gardens, and seasons, who was in love with Pomona. Cary {Grant}
(accept Archibald {Leach}, if some pretentious player says it) He more
or less gave up acting following 1966’s Walk, Don’t Run, after which
he served as director of the toiletry company Rayette-Fabergé. He
appeared in drag in I Was a Male War Bride, [*] and began to receive
work after making a star turn as a ghost in Topper. He was nominated
for Academy Awards for his work in None But the Lonely Heart and Penny
Serenade, but won for neither. His first great comic role came in
1937’s The Awful Truth, and he went on to star in Holiday, Arsenic and
Old Lace and Bringing Up Baby. FTP, name this British actor, who also
appeared in such Hitchcock films as Suspicion, Notorious, and North by
Northwest. “Lines Written a Few Miles Above {Tintern Abbey”} Harold
Bloom has argued that this poem’s mention of a hermit who sits alone
by his fire and the line about a “blind man’s eye” are allusions to
Milton. William Empson made fun of the lines about a “sense sublime of
something far more deeply [*] interfused,” and wondered about the
“motion and a spirit” that “rolls through all things.” The poet thanks
the “forms of beauty” he sees for his “serene and blessed mood” in
which the “burthen of the mystery” is lifted and he sees into “the
life of things,” and reminds his “dear, dear Sister” that nature never
did betray the heart that loves her. Written five years after the day
in 1793 when the poet visited the banks of the Wye, FTP, name this
poem by William Wordsworth whose title refers to a religious building.
{Thomson} Scattering The nonlinear variety was first demonstrated
experimentally in 1998 in the lab of Umstadter at the University of
Michigan. This nonlinear variety of the process has a non-negligible
magnetic field in the expression of the orbit (*) driven by the
Lorentz force on the particle. The cross section for it is generally
stated as the total re-radiated power divided by the time-averaged
Poynting flux. Whether it occurs coherently or incoherently depends on
the quantity two times lambda-sub-d times k times the sine of the
scattering angle. Changing the direction of the radiation but not its
energy, FTP, name this process by which light is emitted from a
charged particle accelerated into periodic motion by an
electromagnetic wave, the elastic analog of Compton scattering. the
{Sassanid} dynasty One of their rulers was deposed by his brother
Zamasp, but with the help of the Ephthalites he regained the crown.
Another of their rulers almost had his throne usurped by his brother
Hormisdas, but overcame him and had a long reign before being
succeeded by his brother Balas, under whom the empire converted to
Nestorianism. Its last great ruler was deposed by Bahram, [*] but with
the help of Emperor Maurice regained the throne. Its last ruler,
period, was the grandson of Khusru Parvis, Yezdigird III, who was
decisively defeated at Nehawand. Its first ruler overthrew Artabanus
the Arsacid at Hormuz, establishing this dynasty in 224 AD. FTP, name
this Persian dynasty that was founded when Ardashir defeated the
Parthians, and ruled for four centuries before being defeated by the
Arabs. {Tractatus Theologico-Politicus} (also accept {Theological
Political Treatise}) Leo Strauss published a 1948 book dedicated to
the study of this work, whose fourth chapter, "Of the Ceremonial Law,"
uses a comparison with the Far East to expand on arguments made about
the origins and consequences of superstition in the preface. Chapter
fifteen refutes Alpakhar's thesis that reason must be accommodated by
Scripture and the book ends by asserting the independence of faith and
reason, as well as the utility of revelation. The most important
section, however, lays out the author’s understanding of the Hebrew
kingdom [*] following the death of Moses, and offers up reasons why
religion should not have a monopoly on governmental policy. FTP,
identify this work which decries belief in the irrational and outlines
Benedict Spinoza’s idea for a tolerant state. {sinoatrial} node (or
{SA} node or {sinoauricular} node) Degenerative fibrosis of its tissue
is one of the major causes of Sick Sinus Syndrome. Phenylalkylamines
and benzothiazepines negate the abilities of its Cav3 channels, (*)
which are expressed at high density in this area to allow for a
massive flux of calcium ions. Adrenaline causes it to act with more
automaticity, making its resting potential even more unsteady and
causing increased heart rate. Lying at the top of the right atrium
where it is met by the superior vena cava, FTP, name this bundle of
Purkinje fibers which sends an electrical signal causing the heart to
pump blood, and is thus a natural pacemaker. The {Power of Sympathy}
The protagonist gets good advice from his friend Worthy and his sister
Myra, but it does no good. In a subplot, Ophelia Shepherd kills
herself after sleeping with her brother-in-law Martin. Mrs. Morton’s
sister also kills herself after Mr. Morton tries to sleep with her,
and the protagonist joins in the suicidal hijinks after discovering
that the woman he wants to marry is really the daughter of his
father’s mistress. This epistolary romance was originally attributed
to the author of Ouabi, but is now thought to be by an author who used
basically the same plot in 1807’s Ira and Isabella. [*] Subtitled “The
Triumphs of Nature,” it uses the tragic fate of Harriot and Harrington
to demonstrate both the “advantages of female education” and the
“dangerous consequences of seduction.” FTP, name this book that was
published anonymously in 1789, though it was probably written by
William Hill Brown, and which is considered the first American novel.
{Servius} Tullius His predecessor was killed in the 38th year of his
reign by assassins hired by the two sons of the man who had preceded
him on the throne. This man married his daughters to the two sons of
his predecessor, [*] Lucius and Arruns, to secure his hold on the
throne. Later historians claimed that he was a prince from Corniculum,
but this is probably a lie designed to obscure his humble origins.
During his 44-year reign, he divided the people into six classes and
instituted a census, and he may have built the Temple of Diana. Having
gained the throne in 579 BC thanks to the machinations of his
predecessor’s wife Tanaquil, he lost it due to the machinations of his
own daughter Tullia. FTP, name this sixth king of Rome, who came
between the Elder and the Proud Tarquin. {Aureng-Zebe} In this work’s
pessimistic Prologue, the author despairs of his poetry and concludes
that wit, like unprotected orange trees, cannot grow in “northern
climates.” In a preface addressed to the Earl of Mulgrave, the author
defends himself against criticism of the last act, in which the
heroine is shown to be fearful of death. In the first scene, Abas
describes the outcome of a battle to Asaph, Fazel, and Arimant, who
worry that Morat will be disloyal to his father. Both Morat and his
father the emperor fall in love with the captive queen of Cassimere,
but in the end the emperor gives up his pursuit of Indamora so that
his son, the title character, [*] can have her. First produced in
1675, it is the last of its author’s plays written in heroic couplets.
FTP, name this work set in India, a tragedy about the son of Shah
Jehan by John Dryden. {Lot} He was captured by an alliance led by
Chedorlaomer, but his uncle led a band of 318 men to rescue him. The
modern Arabic name for the Dead Sea refers to this man, who fled to
the town of Zoar at the behest of two angels. [*] After the death of
his wife, he became the father of Ben-Ammi and Moab, the ancestors of
the Moabites and Ammonites. The son of Haran, he went to Canaan with
his uncle and established himself at Shechem before being given the
Jordan basin. FTP, name this man who offered his daughters to be
ravished instead of surrendering his guests to horny Sodomites, a
figure from the book of Genesis whose wife was turned to salt.
{kulaks} These people were reorganized according to ideas taken from
Thomas Campell's Montana Corporation, as well as planning by Wilson,
Ware, and Riggin. They arose from the destruction of the obschina
system by Stolypin's reform. Undersigned by Yezhov, order 00447
created troikas to prosecute them.  A film by Alexander Dovzhenko
dramatizes their lives. They were later defined by [*] Sovnarkom as
people that used hired labor, were involved in commerce, or owned a
mill or other mechanical equipment.  Their liquidation began following
the 1929 food shortage and the institution of the first Five Year
Plan. Coming from the Russian word for "fist", they were considered
enemies of the proletariat, contrasting with the bednyaks and the
batraks.  FTP, idenitfy these landed peasants that were mass murdered
and deported during Stalin's purges. {Kohlrausch}’s law It was
partially formulated from its namesake listening to solutions with a
telephone, and this law can be thought of as Ohm’s law applying to a
second class conductors. (*) This statement can be used to express the
degree of dissociation by evaluating the quotient of conductivity of
solution at concentration C and the conductivity at infinite dilution.
FTP, name this law which states that the molar conductivity of an
electrolyte equals the sum of the molar conductivities of the cations
and the anions times the number of anions or cations, which is named
for a German scientist. {Argus} This mythological moniker is shared by
a son of Niobe and Zeus who inherited Phoroneus’ kingdom and named it
for himself. It also identifies the eldest son of Phrixus and
Chalciope, who was shipwrecked on the island of Ares when Jason found
him and rescued him leading to a life-long friendship [*]. But the
most famous owner of this name was known for slaying a bull that was
ravaging Arcadia, producing a son named Iasus, and vigilantly guarding
a certain heifer in his role as Panoptes. After he was slain his most
notable features were used by Hera to decorate her favorite bird, the
peacock. FTP identify this name most commonly associated with a
monster who was in charge of watching Io with his hundred eyes before
Hermes slew him. Giacomo {Leopardi} He advanced Epicurean views about
death in his “Dialogue between Frederick Ruysch and His Mummies.” The
titular planetary bodies agree that people are weak and miserable in
his “Dialogue Between the Earth and the Moon,” while one of the title
characters is devoured by lions in Africa at the end of his “Dialogue
Between Nature and an Icelander.” However, he is better known for such
poems as one in which the title character plans to plunge off a cliff,
[*] “Sappho’s Last Song,” and one in which he reflects on how sweet it
is to lose oneself in the sea, “The Infinite.” In his greatest poem,
he admires the “desert flowers” that grow on the side of Mount
Vesuvius. FTP, name this author of “To Sylvia,” “The Setting of the
Moon,” and “The Broom,” an author who died in 1837 and who is
considered the greatest poet of 19th century Italy. {The Work of Art
in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction} It notes that the titular
relationship has been achieved by the desire to bring things “closer
spatially and humanly” and it posits a shift from the ritual to the
political. Beginning with a quote from Valery’s “The Conquest of
Ubiquity,” this work ends with a discussion of Fascism and Marinetti’s
thoughts on War. [*] In this essay the author argues that film is an
“invitation to a wholesale liquidation” and notes that while cult
value diminished, exhibition value flourished through mediums like
photography. Perhaps best known for its section on the withering of
“aura” in its discussion of creative authenticity, FTP, identify this
work, first translated in Illuminations, an essay about the impact of
technology on the aesthetic. {Childhood and Society} The second part,
which includes segments on “the supernatural” and “Fishermen Along a
Salmon River,” reflects the author’s work with Native Americans,
especially the Yurok and Sioux tribes. Its final sections discuss the
“Legend” of Gorky and Hitler’s [*] upbringing and ask the reader to
move “beyond anxiety.” It begins with the case history of “Sam” who
finds a dead mole in his backyard and has a panic attack, this
launches the book’s author into his thesis that to truly understand
personal growth one must not only understand “the theory of infantile
sexuality,” but also the effect of the environment. FTP what book
features a section the “Eight Ages of Man” that describes some famous
stages of psychosocial development and was written by Erik Erikson.
Ben {Jonson} He invokes Pegasus in “A Fit of Rhyme against Rhyme,” and
gets religious in “A Hymn on the Nativity of My Saviour,” a poem that
is included in the collection Underwoods. These verses and others
including a “Pindaric Ode on the Friendship of Sir Lucius Cary,” a
work on the Sidney [*] family home known as “To Penshurst,” and “A
Celebration of Charis,” inspired men like William Cartwright, Sidney
Godolphin, and Thomas Randolph, to utilize him as the inspiration of
their poetical “Tribe.” Perhaps best known for such poems as “On My
First Son” and “Drink to me Only with Thine Eyes,” FTP, identify this
author best known for being a playwright and producing such works as
The Magnetic Lady, The Masque of Queens, and Every Man in his Humour.
{preprocessor} Its most common version uses the octothorp with the
flags 1, 2, and 3 to show from which type of a file a line originated.
Oracle Pro*C is an example of one which allows programmers to use
embedded SQL, (*) and they often make use of languages such as m4 or
parser generators such as bison. Languages such as D and Java have
eliminated the need for this program, whose functions include
concatenating source lines and replacing comments with whitespace.
Providing the final “P” in the acronym PHP, FTP, name this program
which parses “define” and “include” directives in C programs, and,
like its name indicates, is run before actual compilation takes place.
{gap} junctions Mutations in the gene cx43, which codes for their
structural components, is associated with situs ambiguus, and
mutations in cx32 cause Charcot-Marie- Tooth disease in which they do
not function in myelin-forming cells. A sudden increase of calcium ion
concentration (*) or a drop in pH causes their components’ tilt angles
to change, closing them and preventing the breakdown of osmotic
balance. Also known as “electrical synapses,” they serve a role
similar to that of a plant cell’s plasmodesmata by allowing a free
flow of ions but disallowing passage of macromolecules heavier than
one kilodalton. FTP name these collections of connexons, cylindrical
channels two nanometers in diameter which connect the membranes of
adjacent animal cells. War of the {Polish Succession} One of its
fronts was highlighted by the siege of Philippsburg, which saw the
death of the Duke of Berwick, and by the last military appearance of
Eugene of Savoy. More decisive results came from the Battle of Secchia
and from a Spanish victory at [*] Bitonto, both of which took place on
the Italian front. Spain’s involvement stemmed from a desire to undo
the Peace of Utrecht by regaining the cessions of Naples and Sicily
from Austria, while Sardinia wanted to free Lombardy from Austrian
influence and joined France in opposition to Charles VI. Breaking out
after the death of Augustus II, this is, FTP, what war that ended with
the 1735 Treaty of Vienna and dealt with the efforts of Stanislaus I
to gain the throne? {Cluny} [cloo-NEE or CLOO-nee] Its church, begun
in 1089 by St. Hugh, was the largest in Europe until St. Peter's in
Rome was built. It was founded by Duke William the Pious and was first
headed by St. Berno. Richelieu and Mazarin were both titular, though
not resident, heads of it. Sts. Mayeul, Peter the Venerable and [*]
Odo were all abbots during its more active period. From the tenth
century on, it was famous both as an intellectual center and the home
of a new, more centralized version of Benedictine monasticism. More
than three hundred new monasteries, as well as Popes Gregory VII and
Urban II all emerged from, FTP, what monastery in eastern France that
in the early Middle Ages was independent of all authority but the
Pope's? The {Spy} Stock characters in this work include Dr. Sitgreaves
and the servant Caesar Thompson, who works on an estate known as The
Locusts. At one point pursued by Captain Lawton, the title figure uses
the falls off a horse to escape, only to be captured by a band of men
known as Skinners (*) who deliver him to Major Dunwoodie. The
protagonist escapes again and makes Sarah Wharton faint when he
reveals that Colonel Wellmere, to whom Sarah was engaged, is already
married. Early on, the title character relays messages to Mr. Harper
in front of the loyalist Mr. Wharton, as the former is really George
Washington in disguise. Subtitled “A Tale of the Neutral Ground,” FTP,
name this James Fennimore Cooper novel in which the title character,
Harvey Birch, is so good at being a double agent for the Americans
that many think he is on the British side. {Nocturne in Black and
Gold:} (accept {The Falling Rocket} before it is said) A few red
splotches are on top, but the darkest sections of this work, now found
at the Detroit Institute of Art, can be seen on the far left, while at
the bottom a lighter piece seems to be sweeping upwards towards a
portion of the canvas that is more illuminated yet also hazier.
Inspired by a visit to a London pleasure garden, [*] its display
prompted the artist to assert that he may have painted it in two days,
but that patrons pay him not for the amount of work he does, they pay
him “for the knowledge of a lifetime.” This was said at a trial
provoked by one party’s assertion that by completing this painting the
artist had flung a “pot of paint in the public’s face.” FTP identify
this work, a lyrical examination of the delight caused by some
fireworks, a painting also known as The Falling Rocket that was
created by James Whistler. {Philosophjcal Investigations} Stanley
Cavell has argued that this work emerges out of a Kantian tradition
and that its confessional style was forced upon its author by the
nature of the argument rather than adopted out of idiosyncrasy. It
argues that philosophy exhibits a craving for similarity and that the
true metaphysician embraces difference. This is illustrated as the
work sketches the range of uses of the terms “sensations,”
“understand,” and “remember.” [*] The author argues that he is not a
behaviorist, but that if his work is fiction, then it is a
“grammatical fiction.” To that end he rejects the logical atomism of
his previous work, arguing instead for the idea of words as tools and
the use of “language games” as a means of investigating life. FTP
identify this work, a sequel of sorts to the Tractatus Logico-
Philosophicus, by Ludwig Wittgenstein. {Lug} or {Lugh} or {Lleu} In
one myth this deity turned into an eagle to avoid a magical spouse,
who had been created for him by his friends Gwydion and Math. Another
story tells how he put the stone of Fal back in its place and defeated
the King at chess. Also called “Samildanach,” [*] his mother was
imprisoned in a crystal tower on Tory Island so that he would not be
born. Raised to manhood by Goibhniu and Manannan Mac Lir this son of
Ethlinn fulfilled the prophecy that he would one day kill his Fomorian
grandfather, the one eyed Balor. The undisputed leader of the Tuatha
de Danaan after the second battle of Magh Tuireadh, his feast occurred
in August, FTP, identify this Celtic Sun God known by the alliterative
epithet Lamfhada or “of the Long Arm.” Dom {Pedro I} or {Pedro IV of
Portugal} His second wife was the granddaughter of Josephine
Bonaparte, Amelie of Leuchtenberg, whose brother, Charles Auguste, in
turn married his daughter. His last years were marred by a succession
crisis that saw him enlist naval support from Britain and stage a
surprise landing at [*] Oporto, which marked his attempt to defend the
authority of the Constitutional Charter and his daughter Maria da
Gloria from his usurping brother Miguel. His renewed interest in
European affairs came after a severe decline in popularity in his
ruling land due to his reputation as a philanderer and his loss of the
Cisplatine province, which eroded the popular support he gained with
his call for independence in the “Grito de Ipiranga.” FTP, name this
son of Joao VI who ruled as the first emperor of Brazil. {W}eakly
{I}nteracting {M}assive {P}articles (“wimps”) Daniel Snowden-Ifft and
Andrew Westphal proposed that they cause etchable tracks when atoms in
mica recoil from them, and Rocky Kolb posited an huge one which he
gave the suffix -zilla. Their supersymmetric variety, known as
neutralinos, are their own antiparticles. The DAMA detector (*) uses
scintillation to detect when an atom is moved due to one of them, and
the CDMS project uses germanium and silicon crystals cooled near
absolute zero to detect lattice vibrations after collision with one.
FTP, name these theoretical particles that may be the main
constituents of cold dark matter, only interact through gravity and
the weak nuclear force, and are contrasted with MACHOs. Derek
{Walcott} Two Poems on the Passing of an Empire meditates on the
repetitive nature of history and compares the Romans with the English.
What the Twilight Says is a work of criticism, while his protagonists
include Jackson Phillip and Harry Trewe, who interact at the Castaways
Guest House in his drama Pantomime, as well as Camille Pisarro [*] in
the book length poem Tiepolo’s Hound. Best known for works like O
Babylon! and Ti Jean and His Brothers, which are set in the West
Indies, his 1990 revision of the Odyssey was published two years
before he won the Nobel Prize. FTP identify this St, Lucia-born author
of The Gulf, Dream on Monkey Mountain, and Omeros. {“Where Is My
Mind”} “Ooooh – Stop” -- this song became a calling card for producer
Steve Albini as it is indicative of his sparse and dry style. Centered
around a swimming experience in the Caribbean where the lyrics recount
[*} “Animals where hiding behind the rock/except for little fish/ when
they told me east is west.” Another lyric suggests that one “Try this
trick and spin it”. Beastly howls in the background wail next to Joey
Santiago’s spiraling guitar lick and Black Francis’s vocals are
delivered alternately in a higher-octave or spoken. FTP name this song
by the Pixies that was the closing theme in the movie Fight Club. {The
Arlesian} Suites or {L’Arlesienne} Suite The second one, whose opening
“Pastorale” is interrupted by the versimo strains of its “Intermezzo,”
is probably best known for its rousing “Farandole” and the Provencal
folk song “March of the Kings.” The first one features the tender
“Adagietto” and the “Carillon” whose vigorous orchestration evokes the
chiming of church bells. The second was compiled by Ernest Guiraud
following its creator’s death [*] and it’s most recognizable section
might be the minuet stolen from the composer’s opera Fair Maid of
Perth. Both works, however, were based on the ill-fated love story
described in a certain Alphonse Daudet play. FTP identify this pair of
works, both named after a sun-drenched town that Vincent Van Gogh
called home, by Georges Bizet. {Nernst} Equation A 2003 paper by
Mathias Bostrom suggested that it is incorrect because it does not
account for pH dependence on the background electrolyte. Pulstrodes
obtain higher sensitivity than predicted by it, (*) as it predicts a
10-fold sample activity change of a monovalent ion yields a 59
millivolt change in the observed electromotive force across a
membrane. One value in it is calculated by the product of the ideal
gas constant and the absolute temperature divided by the product of
Faraday’s constant and the charge number of the reaction, all
multiplied by the natural log of the quotient of the chemical
activities on the oxidized and reduced sides of the electrode
reaction. FTP, name this relationship which relates the actual
potential of an electrode to its standard potential, named for its
German formulator. Benjamin {Rush} He trained Meriwether Lewis and his
namesake “jalaps” were often used on the explorer’s expeditions. His
own time in the army expired after it was revealed that he supported
the Conway Cabal, though he did end up returning to public service as
Treasurer of the Mint. [*] A lifetime believer in women’s rights, he
also championed abolition in works like An Address to the British
Inhabitants in America Upon Slave Keeping. His other works were
collected in Essays: Literary, Moral, and Philosophical, and he
confronted William Shippen about the organization and attention given
by medical hospitals. Well known for encouraging Thomas Paine to write
Common Sense. FTP identify this Colonial dude who helped fight the
spread of yellow fever and wrote a book, Medical Inquiries and
Observations Upon the Diseases of the Mind, which helped found modern
psychiatry. {The Trial} or {Der Prozess} Franz and Willem get in
trouble and must endure the attentions of “the Whipper,” while
Titorelli sells the protagonist three paintings in exchange for some
advice. It also features romantic exchanges with Huld’s servant Leni
[*] and the waitress Elsa. Its penultimate chapter “In the Cathedral”
describes the parable of the door and the man who dies waiting for it
to open. At one point the protagonist is mistaken for a house painter
and is told that he is an hour and ten minutes late, this is
immediately followed by the washerwoman’s screams. Although Fraulein
Burstner seeks to avoid its main character, Frau Grubach is shocked by
the accusations she hears. The work begins with the protagonist’s
arrest on his thirtieth birthday, FTP, identify this novel by Franz
Kafka about a certain Joseph K. {Pelagius} This man's main works
included three books on the faith of the Trinity and three books of
commentaries on Paul's Epistles. He also seems to have corresponded
with Paulinus of Nola. He met the eunuch Caelestius in Rome at some
point between 411-15, and it was Caelestius who first put forth in
Africa six theses that laid out the basis of this man's namesake [*]
heresy. The doctrine was later condemned by Pope Zosimus, but
Augustine continued to fight it for the rest of his life. FTP, name
this native of Britain who asserted that Adam's sin harmed only
himself and not the whole human race, and thus that man did not need
to be redeemed from Original Sin. {Three Places in New England}
Snatches of ragtime are interspersed in its second section, which is
notable for its depiction of two bands approaching one another as they
play different marches in different tempos. The first movement opens
with the strains of Stephen Foster’s “Old Black Joe”, while the final
section, inspired by a Robert Underwood Johnson [*] poem, evokes mist
and water through muted strings combined with English and French
horns. These build up to a muscular crescendo and then all but vanish.
Also known as its composer’s First Orchestral Set, it depicts the
encampment of Israel Putnam, the achievements of Colonel Shaw and his
regiment, and a walk near the Housatonic River in Stockbridge. FTP
identify this work named for the number of settings its invokes, a
piece by Charles Ives. {Mont Blanc} Describing the earth as “daedal,”
the story of its composition is told in his companion’s work History
of Six Week’s Tour where the author is quoted as saying that it was
completed “under the immediate impression of the deep and powerful
feelings [*] excited by the objects it attempts to recount.” Those
descriptions include lines about the eagle bringing “some hunter’s
bone” and a wolf who “tracts here.” The speaker searches in a cave for
the witch of Poesy as his mind expands from gazing into the “Ravine of
Arve.” Divided into five sections the titular location is described as
having “a great voice” to repel fraud and woe, appearing “still, snowy
and serene,” and “gleaming on high,” FTP identify this work, subtitled
“Lines Written in the Vale of Chamouni,” a work by Percy Shelley about
the largest peak in Europe. {Lecompton} Constitution Judge Rush Elmore
was sent on an unsuccessful last minute attempt to stop the president
from presenting it. John Stringfellow was one of its strongest
supporters, and harshly condemned Acting-Governor Frederick Stanton
for hosting a second referendum on it at Leavenworth,[*] where the
vote was sharply opposed to it. A committee led by Congressman William
English attempted to pass it in the form of a compromise bill
nicknamed the “English Swindle,” but it still failed to be approved
locally and was rejected in favor of another document drawn up at
Wyandotte. Stephen Douglas was a vocal opponent of James Buchanan’s
efforts to pass, FTP, what 1857 constitution that supported the
admission of Kansas as a slave state? {Julia} reaction A modified
version of it is used to prepare alkenylstannanes from beta-
stannylacrolein and another compound. Used extensively in natural
product synthesis, especially in cases where two complex substrates
need to be coupled together via an E-double bond, this reaction
showcases [*] regioselectivity, and the steric factors of the sulfone
substituents also play a role. The alkene formation involves overall
electron addition to the arenesulfonyl group and loss of an
arenesulfinate ion. FTP, name this reaction where a beta-
hydroxyarylsulfone is first converted into either the acetate,
benzoate or sulfonate derivative and then into the corresponding
alkene, that is not named for an actor who portrayed Gomez Addams.
Hendrik Antoon {Lorentz} His polarization factor helps determine the
intensity of radiation passing through a crystal. His number,
according to the Wiedemann-Franz law, is the thermal conductivity of a
metal divided by the product of its temperature and its electrical
conductivity. His namesake electron [*] model treats it as a damped
harmonic oscillator. A local field named after him is also known as
the Moscotti field. FTP, name this Dutch physicist and teacher of
Pieter Zeeman, who collaboarted with George Fitzgerald to explain the
results of the Michelson-Morely experiment and created a set of
transformations that describe changes to mass, length and time of a
body traveling near the speed of light {Exemplary Novels} (or {Novelas
Ejemplares}) (accept “{La Señora Cornelia}” or “{The Lady Cornelia}”
before mentioned, and then go fucking nuts because that is hard
fucking core) One title character is befriended by don Antonio de
Isunza and don Juan de Gamboa after she is betrayed in “The Lady
Cornelia.” The cross-dressing Theodosia is at the center of “The Two
Damsels,” and a seventy year old marries a fifteen year old girl in
“The Jealous Estremaduran.” [*] Better known ones include a work in
which Tomas goes insane called “Doctor Glass Case,” a picaresque about
the sheepdog Berganza entitled “The Colloquy of the Dogs,” and a
romance about the beautiful Preciosa, “The Little Gypsy Girl.” The
crime lord Monipodio allows the two title pícaros to join his gang in
the most famous of them, “Rinconete y Cortadillo.” FTP, name this
collection of twelve works that were to serve as an example of good
literature, according to their author Miguel de Cervantes. Ettiene
Bonnot de {Condillac} He believed that man was born as a statue, his
economic ideas were published in Commerce and Government, and he
argued for the importance of language in logical reasoning in The
Language of Calculation. As tutor to the young Prince Ferdinand of
Parma [*] he composed a thirteen volume Course of Study that included
the works The Art of Thinking and Treatise on Animals. This priest
believed in the reality of the soul even though his most famous work,
which begins “We never get outside ourselves, it is always our own
thoughts that we perceive,” marked him as disciple of Locke’s
naturalism. A good friend of Rousseau’s, FTP, identify this man best
known for the works Essay on the Origin of Human Knowledge and
Treatise on Sensations. {The Condition of the Working Class in
England} Much of this work’s structure was anticipated by its author’s
“Letters from the Wupper Valley” and many of its observations were
made during tours with his friend Mary Burns. [*] Its section on “the
Great Towns” is filled with street schematics, while other chapters
discuss the quality of food, the rate of disease, as well as the rise
of atheism among the title group. Its author was deeply affected by
the “plug riots” and it references the Chartist movement during its
chapter “The Attitude of the Bourgeoisie.” First published in German
in 1845 it was to be forty-seven more years until it was translated
and published in the title country. FTP identify this volume that
begins with a description of the workers at the Manchester cotton
mills, a work by Friedrich Engels. George {Kennan} He argued that the
U.S. should respond to the threat of overpopulation by splitting up
into twelve “constituent republics” in his 1993 exposition of his
political philosophy, Around the Cragged Hill. He won his second
Pulitzer for his 1968 Memoirs, and earlier spent a two year term as
U.S. Ambassador to Yugoslavia during his term as a history professor
at the Institute for Advanced Study in [*] Princeton. His political
career consisted of working as an assistant to men like Summer Welles,
Averell Harriman, and Dean Acheson, while his best-known work came
after George Marshall appointed him as head of the Policy Planning
Staff. FTP, identify this man who signed his name as “X” in the
article “The Sources of Soviet Conduct,” also called the Long
Telegram. {thiamin}e (accept {B1} or {aneurin} before mentioned) Its
namesake pyrophosphate is used in enzymatic reactions that involve
carbon-carbon bond cleavage, as it is a coenzyme for transketolase in
the Pentose phosphate shunt and for alpha ketoacid deyhydrogenases in
the Krebs cycle. Rogers syndrome is caused by defects in the SLC19A2
gene, [*] which codes for proteins that transport this molecule.
Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome is caused by a paucity of this molecule, a
pyimidine ring fused to a thiazole ring. Named aneurin in 1926 when it
was crystallized by Jansen and Donath, fifteen years earlier it had
been isolated from rice bran by Casimir Funk. FTP, name this water-
soluble B-complex vitamin, a deficiency of which causes beriberi.
{Proteus} One mythological figure by this name is the son of Pharos,
the King of Egypt, who according to Euripides is chosen by Hermes to
keep the real Helen after the Trojan War. Later his own son,
Theoclymenus, tries to marry Helen, but is foiled when Menelaus
returns to claim her. Menelaus also figures in another myth featuring
a more famous character with this name betrayed by his own daughter,
Idothea, [*] who advises Menelaus to disguise himself as a seal in
order to catch her father sleeping and bind him. This strategy assures
that his powerful ability to change shapes and escape capture would be
neutralized. FTP identify this mythological name associated with the
“Old Man of the Sea.” Paul Laurence {Dunbar} He pondered the existence
of “the eternal bending skies” in “The Mystery” and notes that he has
been given the gift of song by two masters, though one has infinite
mercy, in “Compensation.” The Keatsian “A Summer’s Night” was less
popular than his “Song of Summer” which begins “Dis is gospel weatha-
fo sho,” marking his debt to writers like Thomas Nelson Page [*] and
James Whitcomb Riley. Not usually overtly political his “The Colored
Soldiers” celebrated black participation in the Civil War, while the
last stanza of “Sympathy” begins with the famous line “I know why the
caged bird sings.” All of these works can be found in the poetry
collections Oak and Ivy and Majors and Minors. FTP identify this
author who also wrote novels like The Uncalled and Sport of the Gods,
but was most famous for his dialect inflected Lyrics of Lowly Life.
{Mauritius} Its outlying territories are Rodrigues Island, the
Cargados Carajos Shoals, St. Brandon, and the Agalega Islands and its
districts include Black River, Pamplemousses, and Savanne. Lake Vacoas
is the chief source of its water supply. It appears in Gravity’s
Rainbow as the setting of Slothrop’s grandfather’s shooting of the
last [*] dodo bird. Named by the Dutch for the governor of Nassau.
Famous authors from this country include the humourist Yvan Lagesse
and Edouard Maunick author of “The Birds of Blood” and “Shoot Me”. It
is the largest member of the Mascarene group a group that includes
Reunion . FTP name this country with capital at Port Louis, located
500 miles east of Madagascar. {Webster-Ashburton} Treaty One side paid
the noted historian Jared Sparks fifteen thousand dollars to
“discover” an old document that would support its ratification.
Article ten was concerned with the extradition of “criminals and
swindlers,” while article eleven explained that some of the previous
conditions had a five year expiration date. Negotiated by the only
cabinet holdover [*] of one participating country’s previous
administration, a coup of signing this document, which had been
presaged by terms John Harvey and Winfield Scott had earlier
established, was gaining the Mesabi Range. It supported a joint naval
blockade for suppressing the African slave trade and granted access to
the St. John River, all while clarifying lingering disputes over land,
FTP, what is this 1842 treaty that established the Northeastern
boundary of the U.S. {Enrico IV} (or {Henry IV}) The servants Harold,
Ordulph, Berthold, and Landolph constantly humor the title character’s
whims. In Act 2, a plan is hatched by Dionysius Genoni at the behest
of the title character’s nephew (*) Charles di Nolli in which two
women will appear to execute life-sized portraits of themselves and
prove the passage of time to the title character. The appearance of
his former lover Matilda and his daughter Frida provides a moment of
clarity for the title character, who admits that he had been feigning
insanity for some time, yet he must consciously embrace his madness
after he murders his rival, Baron Tito Belcredi. FTP, name this work
about an Italian man who falls off a horse and believes himself to be
royalty, a play by Luigi Pirandello. {Scrovegni Chapel} (accept “Arena
Chapel” before it is said, just prompt afterwards) The lower part of
the vaulted ceiling depicts the prophets while the upper portion is
painted blue with golden stars and is meant to represent Heaven. Built
by its namesake to atone for the sins of his father Reginaldo, who is
mentioned as a usurer in the 17th Canto [*] of the Inferno, the altar
features statues by Giovanni Pisano. Its interior is decorated by
framed works that read from left to right and top to bottom; these
begin with The Expulsion of Joachim and include such scenes as The
Feast at Cana and The Mocking of Christ. These culminate with The Last
Judgment on the west wall of this structure, which is well known for
its proximity to the Roman Arena (#) that gives it an alternate name,
FTP, identify this building in Padua that contains The Lamentation and
other parts of the “Life of Christ” frescoes by Giotto. The {Pearl of
Great Price} The last part is a creed that was first written as part
of a letter sent to Long John Wentworth, editor of the Chicago
Democrat. Its second part is an excerpt from the author’s translation
of the writings of [*] Moses. The surviving papyri claimed as the
source for the first part of this work appear to be a portion of the
Egyptian Book of the Dead. This first section of the book recounts
Abraham’s journeys in Egypt and it contains the doctrine of
exaltation. Its title comes from a parable in Matthew 13 explaining
the Kingdom of Heaven in a story about a man selling his possessions
to purchase the title object. FTP name this book by Joseph Smith whose
name suggests a valuable product of an oyster. {Of Love and Other
Demons} (accept {Del amor y otros demonios}) It its preface, the
author describes his days as a journalist, especially his coverage of
the exploration of the crypts beneath the convent of Santa Clara.
Dulce Olivia spreads rumors that one character gave birth to a two-
headed child to get back at her father. That character, who later dies
after her hair is cut off, is bitten by a rabid dog [*] two days
before her twelfth birthday, and even though Doctor Abrenuncio gives
her a clean bill of health, she falls ill, and her father, Don
Ygnacio, visits Don Toribio for a religious consultation. The priest
Tomas de Aquino mysteriously drowns, in FTP what novel where Father
Cayetano Delaura is sent to perform an exorcism on Sierva Maria, a
work by Gabriel García Márquez. {Ziegler-Natta} catalysts Neodymium
based ones are popular in the rubber industry because they give a very
high cis microstructure and have a pseudoliving character that is not
often found in them. Homogeneous betaine ones can be derived from
butadiene zirconocene precursors, and vanadium-based (*) homogeneous
ones have delta sites that constitute chiral pockets for si-propene
molecules. They work by forming a pi complex at a vacant coordination
site, allowing for the accommodation of a propylene molecule to add to
a chain. The most well-known of them is a mixture of titanium chloride
and alkyl-aluminum. FTP, name these molecules that catalyze the
polymerization of olefins, named after their German and Italian
discoverers. Knights {Templar} Most notable among their surviving
ruins are Safed, the desert fortress Kerak, and a stronghold at Athlit
called the Pilgrims’ Castle. After the fall of Ptolemais, Nicholas IV
attempted to enlist them as part of a mercenary alliance, but they
opposed his efforts, just as they had done with James I of Aragon’s
attempts at the Second Council of [*] Lyons. Their downfall began when
William of Plaisians and others appeared at a hearing in Poitiers and
accused them of treason and heresy, prompting Clement V to call
together the Council of Vienne, which ordered their suppression. The
burning of the last grand master, Jacques de Molay, sealed the fate
of, FTP, which wealthy religious order of knights that was persecuted
by Philip IV? {Monument to the Third International} It would be
crowned by an information center, complete with a projector to
illuminate the sky, and was composed of three elements that were to
revolve slowly at different speeds as the presence of people would
continually transform its appearance. By obeying his own dicta of
“tektonika” and “faktura” [*] its creator sought to transform a glass
cylinder, a glass cone, and a glass cube, into a spiral shaped
structure that would combine utility with tribute. Commissioned in
1919 by the Revolutionary Department of Fine Arts, it was to be 400
meters high and according to the artist it was intended to be “a union
of purely artistic forms for a utilitarian purpose.” FTP identify this
work which was to be Vladimir Tatlin’s masterpiece. {The End of
History} and the Last Man It contends that economics plays only a part
in realizing the title condition and that irrational forms of thymos
play a significant role as well. Part 4, Leaping Over Rhodes, contains
the chapter “The Coldest of All Cold Monsters,” which debunks the idea
that peoples can’t democratize without the benefit of a democratic
tradition. [*] Beginning with the chapter “Our Pessimism,” its author
asks how an understanding of man’s desire for recognition would
account for the triumph of a “Worldwide Liberal Revolution.” Its core
argument, originally presented in a 1989 article written for The
National Interest, used Hegel’s ideas about the evolution of human
societies to contend that the current era had seen the “final form of
human government.” FTP identify this work of political philosophy
written by Francis Fukuyama. {J/psi} meson (accept {charmonium})
Investigation of their polarization properties over certain
kinematical regions may show that gluon distributions are governed by
the Balitsky-Fadin- Kuraev-Lipatov equations. Their elastic and
inelastic production is studied at the HERA collider, (*) and the
pattern formed on the spark chamber trace when they decay into a
positron and an electron may help explain their name. Discovered
independently by Samuel Ting and Burton Richter in 1974, they have a
surprisingly long lifetime of 10-20 seconds. FTP, name these neutral
particles with a rest mass about 7200 times that of the electron,
which consists of a charm and anti-charm quark. {Mariana} Animals
abound in this poem, they include the oxen with his low call, the bats
who flitt about, and the mouse who “shrieked behind the mouldering
wainscot.” The sixth of its seven stanzas begins three consecutive
lines with the word “old,” which is used to describe faces, footsteps,
and voices, all of which the title character [*] dismisses. The fifth
stanza describes how “The shadow of the poplar fell/ upon her bed
across her brow” and she seemed to “walk forlorn” through the night
without being able to sleep. The speaker continuously harps on the
disrepair of her abode which is covered in “marish mosses.” Every part
ends with the realization “that he cometh not” and that she wants to
die. That he, would be Angelo, who has left her behind in “the moated
grange,” FTP, name this character from Measure for Measure, the title
figure of a poem by Tennyson. {Skirnir} A great spell-caster, his
greatest deed involved ascertaining a promise to hold a meeting at the
grove of Barri. To extract this oath he must gallop through the fiery
circle that guards a daughter of Gymir, [*] all the while bearing
gifts of life-giving apples, the multiplying ring, Draupnir, and a
glowing portrait captured in a drinking horn. Even though he is armed
with the magic, dancing sword and threatens to behead her, the young
Frost giantess refuses to see his master, the ruler of Alfheim. But as
he begins to mumble an incantation that would make her so ugly that
she would have to lie with the dead, Gerda gets scared and agrees to
the rendezvous. FTP identify this faithful servant to the Gods, who
found Gleipnir, but was primarily associated with his master Frey.
Hermann J. {Muller}   After receiving no formal credit for working
with T.H. Morgan at Columbia, he moved to the Soviet Union, where he
hoped to implement a modern eugenics program. Lysenko spoiled those
plans, and this scientist eventually returned to the US by
volunteering for service in the Spanish Civil War. He expanded on F.A.
Janssens’ ideas in his doctoral thesis on “crossing over,” (*) and he
first gained renown for his 1927 article “Artificial Transmutation of
the Gene,” in which he was the first to show that x-rays induce
mutations in Drosophila. He postulated in 1964 that sex is
advantageous because deleterious mutations tend to accumulate in
subsequent generations of asexual organisms, a theory known as his
“ratchet.” FTP, name this 1946 Nobel Laureate in Medicine, who shares
his last name with the German discoverer of a type of mimicry. {Great
Slave Lake}(Moderator: go ahead and be pretentious and pronounce it
the proper way “SLAY-vi”) Located in the Fort Smith region, it was
named for an indian tribe and cities on its shores include the
villages of Hay River, Gros Cap and Fort Resolution and physical
features include Goulet Bay and McLeod’s Bay in the north and
Christie’s Bay [*] in the south. It is connected with Artillery Lake,
Clinton-Golden Lake, and Aylmer Lake. This lake’s first European
explorer was Samuel Hearne and its waters are the center of large
fishing industry centered on trout and whitefish. Drained by the
Mackenzie River, discovery of gold in the area lead to the
establishment of the territorial capital of Yellowknife on its shores.
FTP name this Canadian body of water, the deepest lake in its
continent and the fifth largest in North America. Edward Chace
{Tolman} His upbringing as a Quaker and his decision to publish an
essay in defense of pacifism got this student of Ralph Barton Perry
and Hugo Munsterberg kicked out of Harvard. Minor works include his
Drives Towards War and Psychology versus Immediate Experience. His
innovations include the use of “cognitive maps” and the distinction
between learning and performance. By embracing “intervening variables”
and rejecting what he called “molecular behavior” [*] he broke with
Watson and Thorndike by attempting to introduce explanatory ideas into
his famous rat experiments. FTP identify this psychologist most famous
for the work Purposive Behavior in Animals and Men. {House Made of
Dawn} Among this novel’s main character’s lovers are Milly and Angela
St. Joan, both of whom encounter the main character in Los Angeles,
where he has problems with the preacher John Tosamah. The fourth and
final section features the main character running [*] a “race for the
dead” through Seytokwa, representing his connection to the land, after
the passing of his grandfather Francisco. He had lost that connection
after murdering a powerful albino whom he believed to be a witch. The
main character’s best friend, Ben Benally, narrates the third section,
entitled “The Night Chanter,” and recalls singing a poem that begins
with the titular phrase. FTP, name this novel about Abel, a Navajo who
returns to his reservation after World War II, the most famous work of
N. Scott Momaday. {Symphony No. 3}, in C Minor or The {Organ} Symphony
It features two motto themes, one is an ascending four-note motive
heard in the introduction and first voiced by the oboe, the other
launches in the Allegro in the guise of an accompaniment, a scurrying
sixteenth line in the violins and later reappears, doubly transformed,
in the lovely slow section. Presented in an unorthodox two-part
layout, this work’s four movements remain unbroken during its
performance. Perhaps the best known part of this work, whose score was
dedicated to Franz Liszt [*], is the triumphant fortissimo section of
the finale, while the most beautiful moment comes with the hushed
lyricism of a certain instrument’s pedal tones in the Adagio, FTP,
what is this work named for a keyboard instrument, a symphony by
Saint-Saens. {Riemann} hypothesis One consequence of it is that any
composite number n has a witness less than 70 times the quantity
natural log of n squared. The Odlyzko-Schönhage algorithm has been
used to verify it for over ten trillion values (*), and it is
equivalent to stating that the de Bruijn constant is less than or
equal to zero. Louis De Branges de Bourcia of Purdue claimed to have a
proof of it in 2004, even though the related Mertens conjecture has
been proven false. FTP, name this yet-unproven hypothesis, number 8
Hilbert’s list, which states that the real part must equal ½ for any
positive zero of a namesake Zeta function. {John Bull’s Other Island}
The Round Tower serves as both a place for lovers to meet and a place
for one character to contemplate heaven. In Act I, Tim Haffigan
appears to beg for a pint of whiskey, but he is exposed as a fraud by
another character. In the 60 page “Preface for Politicians,” [*] its
author speaks of the “curse of nationalism.” Hell breaks loose when
Cornelius sells Matt a pig which goes crazy during a car ride, causing
another character to crash the car. Nora Reilley is naive enough to
think that the expatriate Laurence Doyle will still love her after
eighteen years of separation, and the stodgy Father Dempsey is
contrasted with the “mad priest” Father Keegan. FTP, name this play in
which the Englishman Tom Broadbent goes to the Irish town of
Rosscullen and makes an abortive run at a seat in Parliament, a comedy
by George Bernard Shaw. Jack {Johnson} Late in life he opened his
namesake “Club Deluxe” on Lenox Avenue and took out a patent for a
namesake wrench, but it never caught on. Fond of big furs and the new
cars, after he married Lucille Cameron, it was up to Belle Schreiber
to make the Mann Act accusations stick to him. [*] His contemporaries,
including Sam McVey and Peter Jackson, toured with him around what
was, at that time, known as the “Chitlin Circuit.” But he stood out,
and when the mainstream media, like Richard K. Fox of the Police
Gazette, noted that he deserved a shot at Jim Jeffries’ hand chosen
successor, Tommy Burns, he took advantage. Fittingly on Boxing Day,
1908 he won the World’s Heavyweight Championship, FTP, identify this
man, the subject of Ken Burns’ “Unforgivable Blackness,” who fought
and defeated several “Great White Hopes” at the turn of the century.
The Expedition of {Humphry Clinker} There are two instances of
carriages overturning in this novel, with the first occurring after a
meeting with Sir Ulick Mackilligut in Bath. Later, a ferocious curry
chowder causes one character much discomfort. Other memorable
characters include the Scot Lisnahago [*] who tells of being scalped
by Native Americans. Ultimately, Lydia becomes the toast of Edinburgh
and manages to snag Jerry Melford, while a chance encounter with
Dennison exposes the title character’s true identity as an heir. Its
principle letter writers include Winifred Jenkins and the instigator
of the whole affair Matthew Bramble. FTP Identify this 1771 novel
about an expedition by the title character, a work by Tobias Smollett.
{Letters from a Farmer in Pennsylvania}, to the Inhabitants of the
British Colonies or {Letters from a Pennsylvania Farmer } The second
discusses the relationship between Carthaginians and Sardinians and
notes that there are not many paper mills or glass houses where its
author lives. The third warns that “anger produces anger” but is
signed “Nothing is to be despaired of,” thus asserting the author’s
essential belief in diplomacy over war.[*] Their author was later
attacked by a anonymous author who called himself “Valerius,” for the
staunch conservatism that also saw him draft the “Olive Branch
Petition.” By addressing the Quartering and Townshend Duties
specifically, their author argues for the rights of the colonists to
be happy, which means that they must be free of illegal pressures from
England, FTP, identify this series of works that open “My Dear
Countrymen” and were published anonymously in the Pennsylvania
Chronicle, by John Dickinson. {The Power Elite} Chapter Six of this
work draws heavily on William Miller’s research on The Dictionary of
American Biography, while its next chapter cites Simon Kuznets’ work,
Shares of Upper Income Groups in Savings. After promoting the
importance of a “theory of balance” [*] the book’s argument ends with
a discussion of how the post-Civil War shift from a public to a “Mass
Society,” in conjunction with a prevailing “conservative mood,” has
produced an America led by a “higher immorality.” An organizational
irresponsibility has allowed groups like the Metropolitan 400 to
ascend to new social heights. FTP identify this work that critiques
America’s domination by the “big three”—the Rich, the Military, and
the Politicians—a study by C. Wright Mills. Kurt von {Schuschnigg}
After immigrating to the United States, he began a career teaching
political science at St. Louis University, after which he wrote The
Brutal Takeover. He spent several years imprisoned in the VIP ward of
Sachsenhausen as punishment for a plebiscite he issued to oppose the
addition of Arthur [*] Seyss-Inquart to his cabinet; Seyss-Inquart
would be the man who replaced him in power. The disbanding of the
Heimwehr was perhaps the most significant political move of this man,
who ascended from his position as minister of education to succeed the
assassinated Engelbert Dollfuss as chancellor. FTP, name this man who
saw a Nazi invasion and the Anschluss remove him from his role as
leader of Austria. {Hugh Selwyn Mauberley} The narrator’s encounters
with the Pre-Raphaelites are discussed in the section “Yeux Glaques,”
while it comments on Ernest Dowson’s drinking in a section named
“Siena made me, Maremma unmade me.” It opens with a quote from
Nemesianus, “the heat calls us into the shade,” and it mixes
caricatures of Arnold Bennet [*] and Ford Madox Ford, as Mr. Nixon and
“The Stylist”respectively, into its critique of the state of
literature. This poem, subtitled “Life and Contacts,” was appended to
editions of Personae where it appeared with a note indicating since it
was so clearly a “goodbye to London” many should simply skip it. FTP
identify this 1920 work named for a fictitious poet, a work by Ezra
Pound. {Kullervo} or {Kullervoinen} He is described wearing blue
stockings and on his way back from delivering taxes meets his sister,
is overcome by lust, and rapes her. Later he exiles himself with the
dog Blackie, but when he unconsciously stumbles on the site of the
violation, he is filled with shame and kills himself. Earlier in his
tale, he responds to a prank, where a rock is inserted into his lunch,
by transforming some cows into bears and making them eat Ilmarinen’s
wife. [*] His life began with his evil uncle, Untamo, trying to burn
and then lynch him, but he was impervious to the fire and covered the
tree, from which he was to hang, with pictures. Upon hearing of his
death, Vainamoinen noted that this powerful sorcerer was rocked too
hard as a child. FTP identify this son of Kalervo, a cursed figure
from the Kalevala. {Syracuse} or {Siracusa} According to legend, this
city was founded in 734 B.C. by Archias, who came from Corinth to the
island of Ortygia, which separates this city's two harbors. Its army
famously won the battle of Himera in 480 B.C., beating the [*]
Carthaginians. Its rulers in the Hellenistic period included
Agathocles and Timoleon, and Pindar and Plato both lived there for
periods at the courts of tyrants including Hieron, Gelon and Dionysius
I. The Athenians in 415 failed to capture but the Romans under
Marcellus in the Second Punic War did capture, FTP, what city whose
siege led to the death of Archimedes and Roman conquest of Sicily.
{histone}s. In the Mytilus species of mussel, one sperm-specific
variety of them has developed protamine-like structural properties.
Coffin-Lowry syndrome is caused by a defect in their phosphorylation,
and hyperacetylation (*) of them may be a major cause of Rett’s
syndrome. The epislon and gamma globin genes are associated with them,
and the papillomavirus E7 binds to its namesake deacetylase enzyme,
interfering with transcription. Discovered by Karl Albrecht Kossel,
their H2 through H4 varieties often combine to form a single
nucleosome. FTP, name these nucleoproteins which hold together DNA in
eukaryotic nuclei to form chromatin. {Margaret of Anjou} A number of
histories claim that this figure was nearly killed at the hands of a
Northumbrian robber who was allayed when he realized who it was.
Compromised by the cession of Maine to her father, her long life saw
the reversal of the Haxey judgment, while her marriage, part of the
truce of Tours, [*] aroused controversy when it was arranged in
absentia by the Earl of Suffolk. She ceded Berwick to the Scots in
order to gain their support, and also sought help from the Earl of
Warwick, who was slain at Barnet, leaving her and a young son nearly
defenseless at Tewkesbury. The founder of Queen’s College, in
Cambridge, FTP, identify this embattled matriarch who struggled to
preserve the throne for her husband Henry VI. {Cenerentola} or
{Cinderella} The first act ends with a comic interlude in which the
newly appointed chief butler tastes thirty wines and then gives some
pointers on cellar management. It opens with an overture borrowed from
the composer’s previous opera, La Gazetta, and a father waking up to
recall his dream of future riches. The valet, Dandini, [*] succeeds in
fooling Don Magnifico’s family and this work’s other key moments
include the singing of the sextet “Is it You” and the overturning of a
carriage. The philosopher Alidoro sets the plot into action when he
tells Don Ramiro that a beautiful servant girl lives in the Baron’s
decrepit castle. Featuring the cavatina, “Just one hour in the
Prince’s palace,” FTP, identify this work by Rossini whose roles
include Clorinda and Thisbe, the two evil step-sisters to the title
character. The {Druze} The man they believe to be god disappeared in
1021 while taking a walk. They are probably such a small sect because
they permit no conversion, either away from or to their religion, and
no intermarriage. Only a group of elite initiates, known as [*]
“uqqal” or “knowers”, participate fully in their religious services
and have access to the secret teachings of the hikmah. Their
catechism, the at-Ta’lim, allows for denial of the faith in times of
danger. The belief system was organized by al-Hakim bi Amr Allah and
is developed out of Ismaili teachings but is also is the synthesis of
various Jewish, Christian, Gnostic, Neoplatonic, and Iranian elements.
FTP name this monotheistic sect found in Lebanon, Israel, and Syria.
Narcisco {Lopez} A successful copper-miner, he rebelled against
General O’ Donnell and left for New York after his mentor Valdes was
deposed. His more notable followers included John A. Quitman and he
claimed to be the leader of more than 15,000 members, all registered
to his secret society, the “Order of the Lone Star.” After leaving New
Orleans with William Crittenden, he had planned to coordinate his
group’s activities with those of his brother in Pinar de Rio. [*] Yet
when he landed at Bahia Honda with close to five hundred men he soon
found Royalist forces under General Enna blocking his way, and his
expedition was stopped at Las Pozas, forty miles away from the
capital. Often compared to William Walker who later emulated his
methods, FTP, identify this Venezuelan-born Filibusterer who tried to
conquer Cuba three times in the early 1850s. {Sentimental Education}
or {L’Education Sentimentale} A key moment in this work occurs with
the introduction of the seductive courtesan “La Marechale” at a
masquerade ball. Earlier Martinon had tried to offer this novel’s
disillusioned protagonist some advice about enjoying the city. By the
time his mother’s illness forces him to go home to Nogent some months
later, the main character is a budding lawyer who leaves behind many
Parisian [*] friends including the painter Pellerin and the
intellectual Senecal. Though not a historical work, the novel does
weave in the Revolution, which breaks up a planned tryst with the
elusive married woman at the center of its many relationships. The
inspiration for that character, was also the muse for the female
protagonists in the author’s other works November and Memoirs of a
Fool, and was named Elisa Schlesinger. In this work she is portrayed
as the winsome Madame Arnoux. FTP identify this work, subtitled “The
Story of a Young Man,” a novel about Frederic Moreau’s coming of age,
by Gustave Flaubert. {Gibbs Phase} Rule One consequence of it is that
lamellar and microemulsion states must exist simultaneously at the
lamellar/microemulsion boundary in an oil/water/balanced surfactant
mixture. Failure to account for minor products might make one believe
it is violated in carbon-doped magnesium-boron superconductors, as two
or more solid solutions (*) form in what falsely appears to be a
three-component system. Attempts have been made to interpret it using
graph theory, representing the thermodynamic function defined on the
two-sphere with a planar graph, due to its remarkable similarity to
Euler’s formula. FTP, name this rule of chemistry which states that
the number of chemically independent species minus the degrees of
freedom plus two is equal to the number of phases in the system.
{Democratic Vistas} It discusses the importance of finding an original
“SOUL” and bemoans the “scornful litterateurs” of the day. Originally
published as a series in the Galaxy, it began as a reply to Thomas
Carlyle’s “Shooting Niagara: And After?,” [*] and although it ended up
recapitulating much of the latter’s pessimism, its author seems to
recapture some of his trademark faith in humanity when he asserts that
the ascension of the modern poet alongside a government of the people
for the people, “with all its threatened evils, supplies a training
ground for first class men.” FTP identify this essay that was released
in the same year that “Passage to India” was added to the new edition
of Leaves of Grass, a philosophical work about the American political
system written by Whitman. {The Seasons} or {The Months of the Year}
Originally painted for the Brussels villa of the artist’s patron
Niclaes Jonghelinck, it later became part of Emperor Rudolf II’s
Prague collection. Lesser known sections include The Return of the
Herd and The Gloomy Day, [*] both of which feature the high vantage
point that also marks its most celebrated portion, a scene framed by
skeletal trees that opens up onto a valley with children skating on
the ponds below. Another evokes the weariness of scythe-wielding
peasants and the oppressive heat that surrounds them. It probably
consisted of six panels and its predecessors include the Limbourg
Brothers’ depiction of Nature’s temporal shifts as well as the
artist’s own Triumph of Death. FTP identify this cycle of works that
includes August, The Hay Harvest and January, The Hunters in the Snow,
by Pieter Bruegel the Elder. {Bajazet I} or {Bayezid I} Scholars at
his court included the author of the “Commentary of Purposes,” Kemal
udinn, and late in his reign he married a daughter of John Paleologus
to cement alliances. Given the title “Sultan” after his incorporation
of the Karaman Emirate, he asserted his right to ascend the throne by
having his brother Yakub strangled. [*] His greatest victories came
against Sigismund of Hungary at Nicopolis and Manuel II at
Constantinople. He was eventually succeeded by his son Mehmet, who was
known as “the Restorer.” That nickname was well earned since this man
is most well known for losing a ton of land after overextending into
Anatolia and being decimated at Ankara. FTP identify this military
leader, nicknamed “the thunderbolt,” whose bid for expansion was
stopped by Tamerlane. {Wagram} Six weeks before this battle, the
eventual winning side had been forced to retreat from its enemy's
capital, which it had captured a week before. The losing general's
brother John was on his way with 30,000 men to reinforce the army
drawn up on Russbach Brook. By the time John arrived, his brother
Charles' army was already in retreat and sustaining [*] 40,000
casualties while inflicting 34,000 thanks to the largest amount of
artillery fire in military history to that point. The result of
Aspern-Essling was reversed and the treaty of Schönbrunn was the
proximate consequence of, FTP, what battle of July 1809 that saw
Napoleon's final defeat of the Austrians? William Holman {Hunt} Art
WEAK  Delacroix once said he was “really amazed” by this man’s
depiction of sheep. Works produced after his visit to the Middle East
include The Finding of the Temple, May Day, Magdalen Tower, and The
Scapegoat. [*] Beginning with Rienze, he and his fellow artists sought
to depict a detailed and uncompromising truth in their work. His most
famous didactic painting was inspired by a scene from David
Copperfield, while other works that feature literary characters
include Claudio and Isabella, Isabella and the Pot of Basil, and the
depiction of a tragic lover from a work by Tennyson. FTP identify this
member of the Pre- Raphaelites who painted The Light of the World, The
Awakening Conscience, and The Lady of Shallott. {Boris Godunov} Social
science  Music  )  Stravinsky’s Rite of Spring stole the bass melody
that accompanies the performance of this work’s “duck song,” and other
pieces that mention animals include the Nurse’s ill-fated attempt to
cheer Princess Xenia with a song about a flea, which is followed by
her brother’s ditty about an owl. The tramps Varlaam and Missail [*]
make a discovery at an inn near the Lithuanian border that disproves
Pimen’s claims of foul play. Originally turned down because it had no
leading female role, its composer added a new act, set in Poland, that
features the sinister Rangoni advising the scheming Marina who then
declares her love for the young monk Grigori, a man it turns out is
really named Dimitri. Featuring a scene during which the title
character hears the insistent tick of a clock as he goes crazy and
sees dead babies, FTP, identify this work about an unscrupulous Czar,
an opera by Mussorgsky. {Waldensians} Myth  Geography and Religion
Their historic journey from Switzerland back to Piedmontese valleys
was led by Henri Arnaud. The Mennonite book Martyrs Mirror lists them
as important the history of the doctrine of Believer's Baptism. These
“Poor Men of [*] Lyon” modeled themselves after Matthew 23 and they
absorbed the Humiliati and famously denied the sacraments, purgatory
and the idea of relics. Persecuted by the Roman Catholic Church from
the 12th to the 16th centuries, the beliefs of Baptists such as the
literal interpretation of the Bible and the denial of pedobaptism can
be traced to them. FTP name this group of heretics/schismatics named
after their founder Peter Waldo. {Upanishads} Not fully recorded until
1656 at the order of Dara Shakoh, they contain the first and most
definitive explications of aum as the divine word and the cosmic
vibration that underlies all existence and contains multiple trinities
of being. Teachings based on these members of the [*] Shruti are often
called the Vedanta and their fundamental importance in Hindu thought
is in the equation of atman (the self) with the Brahman (ultimate
reality). Their title is often translated as “sitting at the feet of a
teacher”. FTP name these Hindu spiritual texts that are a commentary
on the Vedas. {Modena} Lying between the Secchia and Panaro rivers,
this city was the Mutina of the Boii, a Celtic people, and was subdued
by the Romans in 218 BC. Ruled by the [*] Este family from 1288, this
city in the Emilia-Romagna region on the south side of the Po valley
is the home of the Italian Military academy and its renowned cathedral
was begun under the direction of Matilda, countess of Tuscany. Located
northwest of Bologna, this city is the birthplace of Pavaroti and is
famous as the Mecca of balsamic vinegar production. FTP name this
northern Italian city known as the “capital of engines” as it is the
headquarters of Maserati and the birthplace of Ferrari. James {Monroe}
The Hoover administration’s Clark Memorandum rehabilitated one of this
President’s major policy achievements. That policy had actually been
authored by his Secretary of State, John Quincy Adams, and was later
modified with a famous “corollary” by Theodore Roosevelt. Because of
this President’s major support for the colonization of Liberia,
Liberia’s capital is named after him. For 10 points, name this man
with a namesake Doctrine, who was the fifth president of the United
States. Vincent {van Gogh} Gerrit Rietveld (“reet-veld”) designed a
museum of this artist’s works including many of his self-portraits,
where this artist’s strikingly red beard highlights the face amidst
surrounding details in shades of gray. Perhaps one of his last
paintings was of a wheat field rendered with broad brushstrokes with
dozens of crows. Hundreds of letters to his brother Theo still
survive. After a stint as a missionary in Belgium, he settled in
Neunen where he created an early work in 1885, entitled “The Potato
Eaters.” Name this Dutch post-impressionist best known for his
painting “The Starry Night” and for his missing ear. {Google } (1 with
one hundred 0s is spelled googol) This company purchased the Zagat
Survey, which rates restaurants, hotels , movies, and shopping. This
company also acquired Motorola Mobility, the wireless division with
cellular phones and networks. This company purchased reCAPTCHA, a
system first developed at Carnegie Mellon University to digitize text,
which is being used to archive the New York Times and manuscripts from
this company’s book division. Name this company with a deliberately
misspelled name that was founded from a Stanford thesis by Larry Page
and Sergey Brin about this search engine. {Jane Eyre} In this novel,
the titular character becomes friends with Helen Burns, who later dies
of consumption after a typhus breakout. In this novel, the main
character becomes a governess to Adèle Varens, a French girl who is a
ward of the man to whom the main character is attracted. A mysterious
fire is attributed to Bertha Mason, the secret wife of this man. This
novel, written under the pseudonym Currer Bell, describes the life of
a character sent off to the Lowood School by Mrs. Reed. Name this
novel whose title character falls in love with the master of
Thornfield Hall, Mr. Edward Rochester, which was written by Charlotte
Brontë . {Bubonic plague} or The {Black Death} or {Plague} In 1940 and
1941, the Chinese cities of Ningbo and Changde were victimized by the
Japanese using bacteriologic warfare causing this disease. Infected
corpses were catapulted over walls in the analogous version of
bacteriologic warfare in Europe almost 600 years earlier. Without
antibiotics, two thirds of infected patients may develop fever and
swollen lymph glands, which can enlarge with a very dark coloration of
the skin. For ten points, name this disease caused by bacteria from
the genus Yersinia which is spread by rat fleas that decimated 30% of
Europe’s population in the 14th century; its name derives from the
characteristic buboes. {Peyton}{Manning }(prompt for full name) This
man guest-voiced on the Simpsons episode “O Brother, Where Bart Thou,
” He hosted Saturday Night Live on his 31st birthday with Carrie
Underwood as musical guest, and on that show is remembered for his
United Way commercial where he manhandles a youth group on the
football field. This man surprised many people when he didn’t attend
his father’s alma mater, the University of Mississippi. He was the
first overall selection in the 1998 NFL draft and holds the most NFL
MVP awards. His brother is the starting quarterback for the New York
Giants. For 10 points, name this current quarterback now fighting a
major injury who plays for the Indianapolis Colts. {Taj Mahal} In the
original designs of this building, a black version was planned on the
other end of the complex. It is surrounded on 3 sides by a red
sandstone wall, but remains open on the river side. A large arched
door in a cube shaped base is crowned by a large onion shaped dome.
The building sits at the end of a long rectangular pond. Name this
monument designed by Ustaad Lahiri commissioned in memory of Mumtaz,
the third wife of Shah Jahan, and located in Agra, India.. {Redwood}
or {Sequoia}sempervirens (prompt for “trees”) Some of their names
include Laurelin, Prometheus, and the Stratosphere Giant. Their
residents include fern mats, huckleberry bushes, and a species of
salamander that spends its entire life cycle in them. Large ones are
called giants, while the biggest ones are called titans. Of the 120
known to exceed 350 feet tall, most live along the Eel River in
Humboldt County. Name these tallest trees in the world. {Paris} This
city was placed under siege by the Vikings from 885-886 during the
reign of Emperor Charles the Fat, but it was never taken. In 1590,
after defeating the Spanish forces of the Catholic League at Ivry, the
Huguenots and Royal Army placed this city under siege. The city was
saved through the help of Alexander Farnese, the Duke of Parma, who
arrived from the Netherlands to oppose the forces of Henri of Navarre.
This city was originally named Lutetia in Roman times. For ten points,
name this city bisected by the river Seine, the home of the Eiffel
Tower and the capital of France. Claude {Monet} In one of his most
famous early works, two boats are seen in the foreground and the Le
Havre port is barely visible in the mist of the background. A red
rising sun reflects its color in the water toward the observer. The
title of the work gave rise in 1874 to the term used by subsequent
painters to denote their style. In two of his famous series, he
painted the same subject multiple times in different days and
lighting, in these cases, the Houses of Parliament and the Rouen
(“roo-on”) Cathedral. Many of his paintings were done at his house at
Giverny (“jee-ver-NEE”), which had a water garden of lilies. For 10
points, name this French impressionist who painted such works as
“Water Lilies.” And “Impression, Sunrise.” {Daedalus }(“DAY-de-lus”)
This man created a hot-water system for a bath that killed the man who
later became one of the Judges of the Underworld. He also made it
possible for Queen Pasiphae (“pas-i-fay”) to copulate with a bull
meant to be sacrificed to Poseidon by making a wooden cow for the
Queen to lie in. Later, he constructed the Labyrinth that contained
the Minotaur. For ten points, name this Athenian architect and
inventor who was confined to the palace in Knossos along with his son
Icarus for his treachery against the King of Crete. {Helium }(accept
He before its mention) This element cannot be turned into a solid at
normal pressures because of its high zero point energy. Its second
liquid state can “creep” along surfaces against the force of gravity
and thus escape an open container. On Earth, this element is derived
from alpha decay of heavy metals in the crust. In the sun, it is
created by nuclear fusion. This element has been used to inflate
blimps since the Hindenburg explosion. For 10 points, name this
lightest noble gas with atomic number two and atomic weight of 4, and
chemical symbol He. Edgar Allan {Poe} In one of his famous stories,
William Legrand, his servant Jupiter, and the narrator decipher a
secret message to find buried treasure from Captain Kidd on Sullivan’s
Island. In another of this author’s stories, an incestuous
relationship is implied as the cause of Roderick’s burying his sister
Madeline alive in their titular house. The author helped to create the
detective story trope in his short stories featuring C. Auguste Dupin.
For many years at Westminster Hall in Baltimore City, a black-clad
figure left 3 roses and a bottle of Cognac on this author’s grave on
the occasion of his birthday. Name this author of The Gold Bug, Fall
of the House of Usher, The Cask of Amontillado(“a-mont-eeyado”), The
Tell-Tale Heart, and The Raven. {The Sun also Rises} In this novel,
the protagonist’s friend, Bill Gorton, is a heavy drinker, while
Robert Cohn is a rich stuck-up Jew who refuses to participate in the
revelry. Pedro Romero is a nineteen year old matador who sleeps with
Lady Brett Ashley. The protagonist is an American World War I veteran
who works as a journalist in Paris and falls in love with Lady Brett
on a trip to Pamplona. Name this book that concerns the exploits of
Jake Barnes, written by Ernest Hemingway. Winston {Churchill} During
the Second Boer War, he escaped from a POW camp and distinguished
himself in the British advance into Pretoria. During World War I, he
was First Lord of the Admiralty and was the inspiration for the
disastrous British naval attack against the Ottoman troops at
Gallipoli. He published a multivolume A History of the English
Speaking Peoples. Name this political figure who replaced Prime
Minister Chamberlain in 1940, whose tenacity and leadership were
integral to British morale throughout World War II. ANSWER:{Tornadoes}
(prompt {Twisters}) They develop from supercells, but are narrow
enough not to be affected by the Coriolis effect in terms of their
cyclonic direction. The strength of these phenomena is measured by the
Fujita and TORRO scales. The United States is the most common site of
this phenomenon especially in a namesake alley in the central Midwest.
This phenomenon is sought after by self-proclaimed storm chasers and
variations include landspouts and waterspouts. Name these violent
rotating columns of air that begin as funnel clouds. {Champagne} This
drink is occasionally opened with a sabre in an ceremonial act called
sabrage (“sa-braj”). The drink is made with grapes and uses secondary
fermentation to carbonate the drink. This drink is used to celebrate
victories in sports by spraying the crowd with the drink, notably in
car racing. For ten points, name this sparkling wine which is produced
in this namesake region in France. George {Orwell} (accept Eric
{Blair} until mentioning) This author’s experience working with the
Indian Imperial Police in 1922 led to his essay “Shooting an
Elephant.” The Last Man in Europe was the original title for one of
his famous books, until the publisher intervened. In this author’s
work, his main character manages to have an affair with a dark- haired
girl named Julia, despite love being illegal. His antagonism for the
Communist faction on the Republican side in the Spanish Civil War
shaped his political ideology. Born as Eric Blair, for 10 points, name
this author of Burmese Days, 1984, and Animal Farm. {Lil Wayne}
(accept Dwayne Michael {Carter}, Jr.) He joined Cash Money Records in
1991 at the age of nine with the rapper B.G. as a part of the rap duo
The B.G’z. In 1997, he joined the group Hot Boys and helped release
their debut album Get It How U Live! Two years later, he released his
debut album Tha Block Is Hot. For 10 points, name this New Orleans
born rapper famous for albums such as Tha Carter and Tha Carter III
with singles such as “Go DJ” and “Lollipop” Wolfgang Amadeus {Mozart.}
In one of his operas, the titular character is submerged into Hell by
a statue after refusing to repent for his ill treatment of Elvira. In
another of this composer’s operas, Prince Tamino sets off with
Papageno to rescue Pamina from the clutches of the sorcerer Sarastro.
Born in Salzburg, he and his sister Maria Anna, whom he nicknamed
Nannerl, toured Europe as musical prodigies. He married Constanze
Weber in 1782 and had six children with her. His work, including the
opera, Cosi fan Tutte continues to represent the archetype of
Classical music. For ten points name this notable Classical composer
of a famous unfinished Requiem , Don Giovanni, and The Magic Flute.
The {Hagia Sophia} ({Aya Sofya}, {Sancta Sophia}) This structure was
originally built after the fires of the Nika (“NEE-ka”) Revolt had
burned down the prior structure. A mosaic in this building at the
current exit (but former Emperor’s entrance) shows the Virgin Mary and
Child with Constantine to the viewer’s right offering a model of his
city. The architects were Antemios (“an-TEE-mee-os”) of Tralles and
Isadorus of Miletos (“MILL-eh-tus”).  The invading Ottoman Turks under
Mehmet II in 1453 converted the church into a mosque. For 10 points,
name this large, domed building whose name means "holy wisdom" that
was commissioned by Justinian I in 532, and is located in Istanbul,
formerly known as Constantinople. Detroit {Pistons} This basketball
franchise was originally owned by Fred and Janet Zollner and was
called the Fort Wayne Zollners. They won 3 NBA championship titles in
1989, 1990, and in 2004 with head coaches Chuck Daly and Larry Brown
and with players such as Isaiah Thomas, Corliss Williamson, and
Chauncey Billups. For 10 points, name this NBA team that plays at the
Palace of Auburn Hills in a suburb north of the largest city in
Michigan. {Positrons }(used in PET scans) These entities, first
theorized in 1928 by Paul Dirac and discovered and named four years
later in a cloud chamber at CalTech by Carl D. Anderson, are currently
being used by radiologists for body scans. These particles are
utilized to identify areas of metabolic activity, pinpointing
infections and cancers. They were the first antimatter particles
discovered, and as such annihilate on contact with their more familiar
counterparts, which are negatively charged. Name these particles with
the same charge as protons, but the same mass as electrons. {Colorado}
River or Rio {Colorado} It was originally called the “Rio Rojo” (“ree-
oh roho”) by the Spanish, because of reddish silt emptying at its
delta. The headwaters of this body of water are located in Rocky
Mountain National Park. Cities near its course include Grand Junction,
Moab (“moe-ab”), Page, and Yuma. Name this river that flows through
the Glen Canyon Dam , the Hoover Dam., and the Grand Canyon in
Arizona. {Hiroshima} This city’s iconic site is the dome of the
Prefectural Industrial Promotion Hall. Its baseball team is known as
the Carp. This city was the destination for Colonel (“ker-nell”) Paul
Tibbetts in an aircraft named after his mother, Enola Gay. Name this
Japanese city famous for its destruction by the first uranium atomic
bomb attack. Pearl {Buck} In this author’s best known work, we follow
the rising fortunes of Wang Lung, his wife O-lan, and numerous
children as they move from the village to a city to better their
lives. As a prominent activist for the mentally disabled, she wrote a
book entitled The Child Who Never Grew. Although she was born in West
Virginia to Protestant missionaries, she grew up in Zhenjiang (“zhen-
jee- ang”), China during her early years. Known as the first American
woman to win the Nobel Prize in Literature, name this author of the
children's book The Big Wave and her best-known novel The Good Earth.
Franklin {Pierce} During his time in office, this president’s son,
wife, and vice president all died, and he struggled with alcoholism.
He drew serious public criticism after his diplomats issued the Ostend
Manifesto, which declared that the U.S. should try to buy Cuba from
Spain and declare war on Spain if it refused. He also drew criticism
for supporting the Kansas-Nebraska Act, which led to a state of near
civil war in the Midwest known as "Bleeding Kansas." For 10 points
name the only President born in New Hampshire, the 14th Chief
Executive of the United States. Claude {Debussy }(“de-buss-EE”) His
piece, Golliwogg’s Cake Walk , was the final part of his Children’s
Corner Suite, which was written for his daughter, Claude-Emma. A love
triangle between a married woman and her brother-in-law comprises the
plot of his opera Pelléas (“pel-lay-us”) et (“ay”) Mélisande (“may-
lee-sand”), which was based on the play by Maurice Maeterlinck (“may-
ter-link”). His composition of a flute solo at the beginning of
Prelude to the Afternoon of a Faun, opens this famous symphonic poem.
Name this composer called an impressionist by some, and a bridge
between late Romanticism and Modernism by others, who composed Clair
de Lune. {Protists} (accept {Protista}) (protozoa is not the name of
the kingdom) In the controversial Cavalier-Smith nomenclature, this
kingdom encompasses the Chromista. Sleeping sickness and malaria are
caused by organisms in this kingdom. This kingdom includes unicellular
eukaryotes (“you-KAR-ee-yots”) that either exist as independent cells,
or if they occur in colonies, do not show differentiation into
tissues, such as protozoa, algae, and slime molds. Name this kingdom
whose etymology comes from Greek for “the first” Aretha {Franklin}
This singer is godmother to Whitney Houston, and her good friend Cissy
Houston sang the operatic whoop in the background of her famous song,
"Ain't No Way." Her rendition of “Respect” was a signature song for
the Feminist Movement in the 1960s. Name this well-known African
American singer, songwriter and pianist, who performed at the
inauguration of President Obama, and is often regarded to be the Queen
of Soul. {Orpheus} He was torn apart by Maenads, his head set to drift
on the river Hebris. This man’s singing drowned out the voices of the
Sirens, allowing Jason and the crew of the Argo to pass safely toward
Colchis. He was born in Thrace, reputedly the son of Calliope, the
Muse of epic poetry. In his most famous quest, he travelled to the
Underworld, and charmed Charon, Cerberus, and Hades with music from
the lyre. He convinced them to release his wife, who had died from
snake venom, but breaks the bargain by glancing back at her before she
leaves the portals of the Underworld. Name this mythological musician
who loses his wife, Eurydice (“you-RID-a-see”), but reunites with her
again upon his death. The {Moon} (accept {Luna}) In 2009, a robotic
spacecraft called LCROSS (“el-cross”) crashed on its surface near its
southern pole and detected 100 kilograms of water in the ensuing
plume. It has one percent of the strength of the magnetic field
relative to the Earth. The core of this entity is mostly inactive, but
surface features indicate a volcanic past. Thanks to the Apollo
program, it is the first and only celestial object other than the
Earth that a human has set foot on. Name this earth-orbiting satellite
that is not, in fact, made of cheese. Calvin {Coolidge} As governor of
Massachusetts, his prompt response to the Boston Police Strike of 1919
gained national attention. His initiative advocating world peace was
named for his Secretary of State and the French foreign minister. This
initiative was called the Kellog-Briand pact. When Dorothy Parker,
poet and satirist, learned of his death, she said "How can they tell?"
Known for his taciturn speaking style, he became the 30th president
with the untimely death of Warren Harding. {Square} (Do not accept
rectangle or quadrilateral) The sum of the first n consecutive odd
integers results in this function of n. In carpentry, the steel one of
these is used to make right angles. This shape was once used as an
infantry formation to defend against cavalry charges. It has the
largest area of any other quadrilateral with the same perimeter. For
ten points, name this equilateral four sided figure that has
perpendicular diagonals. Jackson {Pollock} A curvy female figure
consisting of a column of mathematical symbols is seen in this
American’s painting entitled Male and Female.  Black marble patterns
on top of tones of pink color appear in his work entitled Lavender
Mist. Working from his home on Long Island, New York, after World War
II, he was the originator of the concept of an “action painting.”For
ten points, name this abstract expressionist known for pouring and
dripping resin-based paints on flat canvases laid out on the ground
resulting in his nickname, "Jack the Dripper." Reggie {Jackson}
Inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1993, this outfielder
played for five different teams in the span of his 21 year baseball
career. After helping the Oakland A’s win 3 consecutive World Series
titles in the early 1970s, he moved on to play for the Baltimore
Orioles for one season. His next stop was with the New York Yankees,
where he helped win two consecutive World Series Titles. For 10 points
name this baseball player best known for his nickname as “Mr. October”
due to his heroics during the post-season, especially while with the
Yankees. George {Patton} As Commander of the Third Army, he directed
the rescue of American units surrounded by Germans at the French town
of Bastogne (“bas-ton-yeh”) during the Battle of the Bulge. He
jeopardized his military career by slapping a soldier recovering from
battle fatigue during the Sicilian Campaign. As a result, he was
punished by Eisenhower and relegated to a decoy on D-Day instead of
playing a major part. For ten points, name this American World War II
general, played by George C. Scott in the titular movie. {Mount
Rushmore} The land for this project was seized by the USA, violating
the Treaty of Fort Laramie between the USA and the Lakota Sioux
(“soo”). Known to the Native Americans as Six Grandfathers, Harney
Peak offered a better quality of granite than the original site for
this project in the Needles. President Coolidge urged equal
representation of the political party affiliation of the honored
figures.  For ten points, name this monument conceived by Guston
Borglum in the Black Hills of South Dakota, honoring Washington,
Lincoln, Jefferson, and Theodore Roosevelt.. Wilhelm {Roentgen
}(“rent-gen”) This man’s famous experiment demonstrated a mysterious
luminous effect on a nearby sheet coated with barium platinocyanide
from a cathode ray tube inserted into a black cardboard box. Objects
interposed between the cathode ray and the photographic plate showed a
variable transparency, especially when he observed the bones of his
wife’s hand and her ring. The rays that he discovered were quickly
applied for medical purposes to identify bone fractures. Name this
German Physicist who received the first Nobel Prize in Physics for his
discovery of x-rays. Constantin {Brancusi }(“bran-KOO-see”) He
apprenticed under Auguste Rodin, but left after two months. One of
this artist’s works was a controversial sculpture of a large phallus.
A more well- known work, of which the artist created variations, is of
two abstract figures embracing, called The Kiss. Initially not
considered a piece of art by U.S. Customs, his sculpture of a thin,
elongated piece of polished bronze was imposed a tariff. Name this
Romanian sculptor of Princess X and Bird in Space. {Hera }(Juno is
wrong, no prompt) . She is the mother of Eileithyia (“Ay-lay-thia”),
the goddess of childbirth and midwifery and of Hebe (“hay-bay”),
goddess of youth and cupbearer to the gods Along with Hestia and
Demeter (“de-MEET-er”), this Greek goddess is one of Zeus’s three
sisters. She gave birth on her own to Typhaon (“TIE-fon), the monster,
and to Hephaestus (“heh-fay-stus”). For ten points, name this Greek
goddess, mother of Ares, symbolized by a peacock, married to Zeus, and
with Roman name Juno. {Les Misérables} The main character of this
novel assumes the pseudonym of Monsieur(“miss- yer”) Madeleine (“mad-
eh-LEN”) to avoid imprisonment as a repeat offender. This novel takes
place throughout a 17 year period, ending in the June Rebellion. The
novel is divided into five volumes with the first entitled Fantine
(“fan-TEEN”). A police detective named Javert (“ja-VAIR”) kills
himself when he has to choose between obeying the law and doing what
is moral. For ten points, name this novel in which the protagonist is
jailed for 19 years because he steals a loaf of bread, a work about
Jean (“jon”) Valjean (“val-jon) written by Victor Hugo.. ANSWER:{
dream(s)} Jung (“Yoong”) thought that they compensate for one-sided
attitudes, while Freud thought that they were a form of unconscious
wish fulfillment. The scientific study of this phenomenon is called
oneirology (oh-nay-RO-lojee”). In the Book of Genesis, Joseph's
ability to decipher them leads to his high position in Egypt. Research
into this phenomenon is used to make connections between memory,
mental disorder, and the functions of the brain in our subconscious
state. Name this phenomenon which was previously thought to occur only
during REM sleep. Ulysses Simpson {Grant} This man went bankrupt when
Ferdinand Ward swindled his lifetime savings, but his acclaimed
memoir, finished days before he died, brought his family out of
bankruptcy. The Black Friday and Whiskey Ring scandals were among
several that rocked his two term administration. He led the successful
Army of the Tennessee at the Battle of Shiloh and later led the army
of the Potomac, successfully forcing General Lee’s surrender at
Appomattox. His nickname was derived from his desire to accept "no
terms except unconditional and immediate surrender". For ten points,
name this individual featured on the $50 bill, the 18th President of
the United States. {Luray Caverns} or Cave System While searching for
a tourist site he could develop, Alexander Campbell discovered this
place in 1878 when air rushing out from a sinkhole accidentally blew
out his candle. This place boasts impressive structures including
“Pluto’s Ghost or Chasm,” “Dream Lake,” and “Saracen’s Tent” amidst
the limestone walls and formations. The Great Stalacpipe Organ
produces symphonic tones when struck with electronic mallets; this
stalactite organ is also the world's largest musical instrument.
Located in the Shenandoah Valley, for ten points, name this Virginian
cave system, the largest cavern in the Eastern US. Ian {Fleming} This
author wrote a popular book series, whose main character was named
after an ornithologist who studied Caribbean birds. After graduating
from Eton (“EE-ton”) College and the military academy in Sandhurst,
this author worked with Naval Intelligence before building a summer
home called Goldeneye in Jamaica. He wrote a children's book for his
son Caspar about a flying car. His novels  Casino Royale and From
Russia with Love were later adapted into films during the 1960s. For
10 points, name this author of Chitty Chitty Bang Bang and the James
Bond Series. Grigori Yefimovich {Rasputin} He survived previous
assassination attempts by a former prostitute turned religious fanatic
and by a group of nobles led by Prince Felix Yusupov, although he
eventually died from drowning in the Neva River. He is most famous,
though, for having supposedly healed the Tsarevich (“ZAR-eh-vich”)
Alexei of hemophilia. For ten points, name this advisor to the royal
family of Czar (“zar”) Nicholas II, a Russian holy man who was reputed
to have “hypnotized” the royal family. {Sulfur } The strength and
insolubility of keratin comes from cross-linking between these
elements. Thermophilic bacteria utilize this element by oxidation or
reduction, since this element is so abundant in hot springs and
volcanic regions. Biotin, thiamine, glutathione (“gloo- ta-THIGH-
own”), methionine (“meh- THIGH-oh-nin”), and cysteine (“sis-teen”)all
incorporate this element in their organic structure. This element is a
component of gunpowder and is used in the vulcanization of rubber.
This element is called brimstone in the Bible. For ten points, name
this bright yellow element with atomic number 16 and atomic weight 32,
whose symbol is S. {Krishna} His devotees included Aandal and
Chaitanya. Though he was born into a royal family, he grew up in a
village as a cowherd playing his flute and cavorting with the cowherd
girls, or ‘gopi’. He gives his advice on the battlefield of
Kurukshetra while serving as the charioteer for the warrior Arjuna. As
depicted in the Bhagavad Gita, name this Hindu deity, the eighth
incarnation of Vishnu. Grant {Wood} This artist painted his mother
with a farm in the background, while emphasizing the decorative
stitching on her dress, the cameo around her neck, and the potted
plant she is holding. This artist’s work is entitled Woman with
Plants. Other paintings include a Midnight Ride of Paul Revere, Parson
Weem’s Fable, and his masterpiece at the Art Institute of Chicago,
which features his dentist and his dentist's sister often mistaken as
a couple. For 10 points, name this artist who painted a farmer and his
daughter standing in front of a farmhouse with a Gothic window,
entitled American Gothic. {Henry V} In this play, Katherine of Valois
(“val-WAH”) tries to learn English in one scene and awkwardly tries to
communicate with the titular character before their marriage. At the
end of the play, the king dies young, leaving his infant son in charge
in a difficult political time. At the Battle of Hartfleur, the titular
character exhorts his troops with “Once more unto the breach, dear
friends, once more.” Name this final play of Shakepeare’s historical
tetralogy which recounts the English victory over the French during
the Hundred Years War at the Battle of Agincourt. {Sikhism} This
religion’s ten enlightened masters lived between 1469 and 1708,
mandating no priestly caste and creating holy scriptures that can be
read by anyone in the home or in the Gurdwara, or temple . A famous
Gurdwara of this religion is called the Golden Temple in Amritsar.
Adherents to this religion carry or wear physical articles of faith
such as the kesh (unshorn hair), the dastar(turban), kanga (comb), and
kara (steel bracelet), among others. For ten points, name this fifth
largest religion in the world, founded by Guru Nanak, whose name
derives from the Punjabi word for disciple. {Candide} (or{ Candide, ou
Optimisme)} This literary work opens in a castle in Westphalia, and
concerns the illegitimate nephew of a baron who is ejected from the
castle after kissing the baron's daughter, Lady Cunégonde. He faces a
series of hardships based on real-world events such as the Seven
Year’s War and the 1755 Lisbon Earthquake. As the story progresses,
this titular man becomes more and more disillusioned with the
teachings of his mentor, Dr.Pangloss. For ten points, name this French
Enlightenment-era novella written under the pen-name Voltaire.
ANSWER:{Archimedes }(“ar-ki-MEED-eez”) A missing palimpsest of his
writings has recently been translated at the Walters Museum and
reveals knowledge of calculus 1800 years before Leibniz and Newton. He
created a system of catapults, levers, and pulleys to defend his
native city of Syracuse in the 3rd century BC. For 10 points, name
this man who is known for discovering an accurate estimate for Pi and
for running down the streets yelling ‘Eureka’ (“you-REEK-ah”), after
determining the purity of a gold crown from its buoyancy. Joseph
{Haydn }(“HIGH-den”) At age 67 he wrote the oratorio, The Creation,
based on the text of Milton's Paradise Lost. For much of his life he
was the court composer for the Hungarian House of Esterházy. He was a
friend of Mozart and a teacher of Beethoven. This German composer is
called "The Father of the String Quartet." Name this German composer
of The Miracle Symphony and The Surprise Symphony. {Main Street} In
the novel, the protagonist goes to Washington after an argument with
her husband, the town doctor. Bea and her son Olaf die of typhoid, and
the dramatic club started by the protagonist flops on its first play,
The Girl from Kankakee. The protagonist becomes very close to a young
man named Erik Valborg. Dr. and Mrs. Will Kennicott live in a town
where people gossip for the majority of their time. For ten points,
name this novel describing a young woman named Carol Milford in the
town of Gopher Prairie, written by Sinclair Lewis. Andre Romelle
{Young}, or {Dr. Dre} This musician rose to fame as a DJ in Los
Angeles and is recognized for his pioneering songs in the style of
West Coast G-Funk. His earliest recordings were released in an album
titled “Concrete Roots.” This musician also produced music and signed
on famous rappers such as Snoop Dogg, Eminem and 50 Cent to his former
company Death Row Records. He now owns Aftermath Entertainments which
released his recent album, Detox. For ten points, name this rapper who
is in songs such as “I Need a Doctor” and also endorses Beats audio,
produced by Monster. Andy {Warhol} His artwork was influenced by the
pictures of celebrities he collected as a bedridden boy suffering from
chorea (“ko-rea”). After an assassination attempt on his life by
Valerie Solanas, this man stopped making films and controversial art.
He was criticized for mass producing his pop art and believed that “in
the future everyone [would] be famous for fifteen minutes.” For 10
points, name this man famous for his depictions of Marilyn Monroe,
Elvis Presley, Elizabeth Taylor, Coca Cola bottles, and cans of
Campbell’s Soup. {Ural}Mountains Magnitogorsk was founded in the 1930s
on the southern end of this mountain range as a center for
metalworking. These mountains extend from the Kara Sea to the Kazakh
steppes. The rivers from these mountains flow into the Caspian Sea or
the Arctic Ocean. The location of most of Russia’s mineral mines, for
ten points, name this mountain range whose eastern side is usually
considered the natural boundary between Europe and Asia. {The
Importance of Being Earnest} In this work, a man prepares cucumber
sandwiches for his aunt but eats them all before she arrives. A tutor
for a girl enjoys flirting with Dr. Chasuble. One main character
usually pretends to have an unscrupulous brother in the country, and
another pretends to have a sick friend named Bunbury. A man is found
to be the older brother of his best friend, and Gwendolyn and Cecily
are led to believe that their suitors have a name that “inspires
absolute confidence”. For 10 points, name this play with protagonists
Algernon Moncrieff (“mon-kreef”) and Jack Worthing by Oscar Wilde.
ANSWER:{General Relativity} or {Theory of General Relativity}{
(}prompt for relativity) Eddington’s 1919 eclipse expedition confirmed
this concept by showing how light from a star was bent by the sun.
First published in 1916, it explains that gravity is not a force like
other forces, but is a consequence of the fact that space-time is not
flat, but warped or curved by the distribution of mass and energy in
it. Name this theory proposed by Albert Einstein. {Kaaba }(“KAH-ba”)
The stone on the southeast corner of this square black granite
building is probably a meteorite. This building’s four corners point
in the cardinal directions and this structure is often surrounded by
thousands of worshippers reciting religious verses. This temple is
said to have been built by Abraham and Ishmael and is surrounded by
the mosque, Masjid al-Haram. For 10 points, name this Muslim holy site
and a destination on the Hajj located in Mecca. Linus {Pauling} He
designed his house to have two wings connected at an angle similar to
the angle between carbon atoms in a benzene molecule. He was the first
to describe hybridization of atomic orbitals in a seminal paper in
1932, along with the concept of resonance. He introduced the concept
of electronegativity and created an eponymous numerical scale for the
electronegativity of elements. For 10 points, name the only person to
ever have received two unshared Nobel Prizes, one for Chemistry and
one for Peace, who was an insistent advocate of large doses of vitamin
C for health. John Ozzy {Osbourne} This singer-songwriter’s rise to
fame began as the lead vocalist of the English heavy metal band Black
Sabbath. His career has spanned over 40 years, and he sold 100 million
albums worldwide with songs such as “Crazy Train” and “I Don’t Wanna
Stop”. For ten points name this English singer-songwriter known as
“The Prince of Darkness” who is famous for expanding his career to a
new medium when he became a star in his own reality TV show in the
early 2000s along with the rest of his family. {Aristophanes} In one
of this playwright’s famous works, an elderly indebted man enrolls his
son in classes to learn Rhetoric in order to outwit his creditors in
court. In the work, this playwright satirizes the teachings of
Socrates. In another famous work , this playwright describes how the
women of various city states conspire to stop their husbands from
fighting in the Peloponnesian War by withholding sex from them until
they agree to negotiate. Name this master of ancient Greek comedy in
the theater, with works such as “The Clouds,” “Lysistrata,” “ The
Birds,” and “The Frogs.” {Riga } This capital city built on the
Daugava (“DOW-ga-va”)River as it flows into the Baltic Sea was
essentially a German city-state from the time of the Knights of the
Sword, despite occupations by the Poles, Swedes, and Russians along
the way. The city is famous for its art nouveau architecture and its
amber. The country of this capital is nestled between Estonia to the
north and Lithuania to the south. Name this largest city and the
capital of Latvia. {Don Quixote }(“kee-HOE-tee”) de la Mancha One of
his only successful endeavors involves a Biscayan who challenges his
honor. Another adventure leads to a bloody victory over the wineskins
hanging near his bed. As the Knight of the Mournful Countenance, he
rides on his steed Rocinante, righting wrongs in the name of his lady
Dulcinea (“dool- see-NAY-ah”)and accompanied by his reluctant squire
Sancho Panza. Name this fictional creation of Miguel de Cervantes
(“ser-VAN-tays”). Thomas {More} His best known work is narrated by
Raphael Hythlodeaus (“hith-LOW-dee-as”), a traveler who describes the
government and social life of an island nation. This author and
statesman supported the papal position to deny the King his divorce,
clearly opposing the First Succession Act. After refusing to attend
the coronation of Anne Boleyn as Queen of England, he was imprisoned
in 1534 and eventually beheaded in his position as Lord Chancellor to
King Henry VIII. Name this author and statesman who was canonized by
the Catholic Church in 1935 and whose magnum opus is Utopia. {Amino
acids} These chemical compounds have been found within carbonaceous
meteorites, suggesting their formation in space. Their amine and
carboxylic acid functional groups allow them to have amphiprotic
properties. For human nutrition, they are divided into essential and
non-essential categories. They combine via condensation reactions to
form polypeptide chains. For 10 points, name these structures that are
the repeating building blocks of proteins. {Vatican City} (Prompt on
{Vatican}) Over half of the area of this landlocked city-state
consists of plants and gardens established in the Renaissance and
Baroque eras. The country’s entire army consists of a one-hundred
member unit called the Swiss Guards. Its famous basilica is the
largest in the world. Containing artwork such as the ceiling of the
Sistine Chapel and Michelangelo’s Pieta, name this small city-state
which is the enclave for the Pope within Rome. Charlie {Sheen} He
plays a drug dealer who kisses Jennifer Grey in Ferris Bueller's Day
Off. He played Tom Logan in both Scary Movie 3 and 4, and his
character dies in Scary Movie 4 after overdosing on Viagra and falling
off a balcony. He has appeared with his brother, Emilio Estevez, in
Young Guns and in Men at Work. For 10 points name this actor who has
become infamous for his drinking, womanizing, and cocaine abuse and
was fired from CBS's series Two and a Half Men. St. Thomas {Aquinas}
(Thomas {Aquinas}) In the recent book God Delusion, atheist Richard
Dawkins analyzes and rejects this man’s arguments regarding the five
proofs of God’s existence. This man reorganized Aristotle's ideas in
Christian terms, particularly relying on Aristotle’s Metaphysics.
Known as the "Angelic Doctor", he was canonized five years after his
death by Pope John XXII (22nd). For ten points, name this theologian
of the Dominican order, who, in the tradition of scholasticism was the
author of the Summa Contra Gentiles and the Summa Theologica.
{Sukkot}or {Sukkos} (accept Feast of Booths and Feast of Tabernacles
before mentioned.) On this holiday, a daily blessing is made over the
lulav, (leaves from a willow, myrtle, and palm tree), and the etrog, a
citrus resembling a large lemon. This holiday lasts 7 days in Israel,
8 in the diaspora, during which meals are eaten inside of little huts
that are reminiscent of the dwellings that housed the Israelites
during their 40 years traveling in the desert after the Exodus from
Egypt. This Jewish holiday is also called the Feast of Booths and
Feast of Tabernacles and is one of the 3 pilgrimage holidays when
Hebrews were commanded to make a pilgrimage to the Temple of
Jerusalem. Name this Jewish holiday that is celebrated 5 days after
Yom Kippur, the Jewish High Holy Day. {Clarinet} There are three main
registers on this instrument, and one of them is named after its
predecessor, an instrument made of cane called the chalumeau (“shal-
oo-moe”). This instrument’s name literally means “little trumpet”, a
misleading name since the instrument is a woodwind rather than brass
instrument. Although it is traditionally made of wood, the first metal
version of this instrument was made in 1887 and modern versions of
this instrument are typically painted black and have silver-colored
keys as well. Name this single-reed instrument that is typically tuned
in B-flat but also comes in bass, A-flat, and E-flat varieties.
ANSWER:The {Fairly Odd Parents} The main character of this popular
show has only two friends at school, named AJ and Chester. Two of the
main characters on this show originate from a different world
connected to the earth by a rainbow and populated by winged beings.
Danny Phantom and T.U.F.F. Puppy are two other creations of this
show’s originator, Butch Hartman. Tootie and Trixie Tang are the main
love interests of the main character. Name this show starring pink-
hatted, buck- toothed Timmy Turner and his fairies Cosmo and Wanda.
{Invisible Man} [do not accept {The Invisible Man} by H.G. Wells] In
this work, the narrator drives a trustee of his college around the
campus, and tells him a story about Jim Trueblood. The president of
the narrator’s college gives him seven recommendation letters, but Mr.
Emerson reveals that they depict the narrator as unreliable and
dishonest. A man named Clifton sells dancing “Sambo” dolls without a
permit and is shot by white policemen, leading the narrator to hold a
funeral for him without the Brotherhood’s permission. The narrator
meets Ras the Exhorter after being asked to join the Brotherhood by
Brother Jack. For 10 points, name this novel about a black man who
tries to understand his identity by Ralph Ellison. {Andrew Wyeth} [do
not accept {N.C. Wyeth}, prompt on “Wyeth”] This painter’s father was
the sole illustrator of the Scribner Classics, and his father was
particularly famous for his illustrations of Treasure Island. He
created 240 portraits in a series of paintings that suggested a love
affair between him and the titular woman in The Helga Pictures. With
studios in Cushing, Maine and Chadd’s Ford, Pennsylvania, this
artist’s most famous painting depicts a girl with polio crawling to
her house. For 10 points, name this American realist who painted
Christina’s World. {Amazon} River The first European to sail into this
river in 1500 was Vincente Pinzón (“peen-ZONE”). Its most distant
source of water derives from the Nevado Mismi, located in the Peruvian
Andes.  This river's watershed is the largest in the world,
encompassing more than five countries. For ten points, name this river
located in South America, second largest in the world and encompassing
much of Brazil. Queen Lydia Paki Kamekaha {Lili’uokalani}(“lily-oh-
kalani”) This woman was arrested by U.S. Marines in 1893 at the
request of plantation mogul Sanford Dole, who then became president of
the new republic. She was married to John Owen Dominis and she only
was able to rule for 2 years before her arrest. In 1897, she addressed
Congress to oppose U.S. annexation of her former dominion. Name this
author of Hawaii’s Story by Hawaii’s Queen, the last ruler of the
kingdom of Hawaii. George Armstrong {Custer} In 1874, his announcement
of discovering gold led to the Black Hills Gold Rush. Always the
center of press publicity during the Civil War, he was present for the
surrender of General Robert E. Lee at Appomattox. He famously
graduated last among his class of 34 West Point cadets. His successes
in the Civil War were overshadowed by his subsequent disastrous
campaign in 1876 against the Lakota, Cheyenne, and Arapahoe tribes at
Little Big Horn. For ten points, name this U.S Army officer who was
killed in a namesake last stand in Montana. {Odysseus} In one of
Sophocles’ plays, a man falls on his sword after this man wins the
armor of a deceased comrade. He is told not to steal the cattle of
Helios by Tiresias (“tie-REE-see-as”). An olive tree makes up the main
leg of his marriage bed, and his knowing this fact proves his identity
to his wife. This man kills all of Penelope’s suitors after being
sidetracked on a voyage by others like Calypso and Circe (“SER-see”).
For ten points, name this Greek King of Ithaca known for his cunning
intelligence, who appears in the titular epic written by Homer. Justin
{Bieber }(“bee-ber”) On November 23, 2009, he broke his foot while
appearing in London with Taylor Swift. After winning numerous AMA and
MTV awards, this entertainer also created a nail polish line with
Nicole OPI, published a New York Best Seller book, and created a
documentary, which became the 3rd highest grossing documentary of all
time. For 10 points, name this international sensation from Canada
discovered by Scooter Braun in 2008, famous for his music video Baby
and for his bowl cut hairstyle. The {Mafia} (or {Cosa Nostra}) (prompt
for The Mob) The subject of the Valachi hearings in the Senate in
1963, this organization practices a code of silence known as “omerta.”
The hierarchy involves a capofamiglia or boss who is aided directly by
a sotto capo (or underboss) and a consigliere, or a counsellor. One
name for this group means ‘our family’ in Italian. For ten points,
name this criminal syndicate that holds economic and political sway
over Sicily and is celebrated in the Godfather novels and movies. John
Forbes {Nash} Jr. While at the Carnegie Institute of Technology, this
man invented his namesake “game,” which was almost identical to the
popular game now known as “Hex”. Later, at Princeton University, he
was disliked by his colleagues due to his eccentric personality and
schizophrenia, but he was well-known for his namesake equilibrium
theory regarding non-cooperative games, which contributed to his
influential role in the mathematical field of game theory. For this,
he went on to win the 1994 Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences. For ten
points, name this man who is the subject of the movie A Beautiful
Mind. {Platypus}(Ornithorhynchus{)} Males have a venomous spur on the
hind feet, which is unusual for a mammal. Besides the echidna, this is
the only other living animal genus of the order of monotremes. It has
a duck-shaped bill and a beaver-like tail which are adapted to its
semi-aquatic habitat. Name this egg-laying mammal, which inhabits
Australia and Tasmania. ANSWER:{20,000 Leagues Under the Sea} The
story is narrated by Professor Pierre Aronnax, a marine biologist, who
is accompanied by his assistant Conceil (“con-say”) and the harpoonist
Ned Land . Following the wreck of the ship Abraham Lincoln, the three
protagonists are rescued by an underwater electrically powered vessel.
These three escape from the vessel at the end of the novel when it
encounters a Maelstrom off the coast of Norway. Name this novel that
recounts the journey of Captain Nemo in his submarine, the Nautilus, a
work by the science fiction author, Jules Verne. {Fallingwater}
Adjacent to a tributary of Bear Run, this house is famous for the use
of concrete and stone slabs to connect the house with surrounding
nature and for the use of cantilevers for support of the overhang of
the house. Edgar J. Kaufmann commissioned this building as a vacation
home to get away from city life. It is located the Allegheny Mountains
in Pennsylvania. Name this Historic National Landmark by Frank Lloyd
Wright which seemingly hangs over a waterfall . {Zwitterions}
Sometimes called an inner salt, these compounds are often tautomerized
(“taw-tomerized”) forms of compounds with acidic and basic components.
The name derives from the German word for “hybrid.” Amino acids in the
solid phase and sometimes even in the gas phase show positive and
negative charges at the same time using neutron diffraction
measurements. Name these compounds that are characterized by full unit
positive and negative charges at different locations in each molecule.
ANSWER:{Edward, the Black Prince}; {Edward of Woodstock } (Prompt on
Edward) This man makes an appearance in The White Company and Sir
Nigel, historical novels by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle. He also is rescued
by Ralph Fitzgerald in World Without End by Ken Follett. A large
statue of this man made in 1903 by Thomas Brock stands in Leeds,
England. Although he never ascended to the throne, he won victories at
battles such as Crécy (“cray-see”) and Poitiers (“pwat- eeay”),
culminating in the capture of John the Good, King of France. Name this
son of Edward III who never became king but is known for his colorful
sobriquet (“soe-brickay”). {Syria} Although they comprise only 15% of
this country’s population, the Shia branch known as the Alawites
control the military and the presidency of this mostly Sunni nation.
Almost 50,000 people were massacred in 1982 at Hama in this country by
then-president Hafez al-Assad. Name this country which is currently
experiencing protests and continued violence against President Bashir
al-Assad with capital in Damascus. {Delphi }{(}accept {Oracle at/of
Delphi)} It is known for its Pythia, who would enter trances that are
believed to have been drug-induced, in order to make predictions for
the future. Built around a sacred spring on the slopes of Mount
Parnassus, this site was considered to be the “omphalos” or navel of
the earth. For 10 points, name this site most famous as a destination
for many Greek heroes who journeyed for advice from the eponymous
Oracle. Period of the {Three Kingdoms} or {Three Empires} (Prompt on
Six Dynasties) Some historians date the start of this period with the
foundation of the state of Cao Wei (“cow way”) in 220 B.C.E; others
date the start to the Yellow Turban rebellion in 184 AD. The
establishment of Cao Wei was made possible by Cao Cao’s victory in the
Battle of Guandu over a rival warlord, Yuan Shao. Another empire
during this period was led by Lui Bei (“looee bay”) who was aided by
Guan Yu and Zheng Fei (“zheng fay”)in the Yellow Turban rebellion. For
ten points, name this period in Chinese history in which the Wei
(“way”), Shu, and Wu Empires competed for power over China. {TNT}
[accept {trinitrotoluene}] Its first commercial use after its
discovery by Wilbrand in 1863 was as a yellow dye. When in contact
with human skin, this chemical compound causes the skin to become a
bright yellow-orange color . It can be used effectively in wet
environments and remains insensitive to shock and friction, clearly an
advance over older explosives such as gunpowder and dynamite, which
are prone to accidental detonation. For 10 points, name this explosive
chemical compound which is synthesized from a toluene (“tah-loo-een”)
backbone that shares its initials with a popular TV channel. Auguste
{Rodin} His first major commissioned work was modeled by a Belgian
soldier, and portrays a nude male with his arms raised in the air
entitled “The Age of Bronze.”. In 1880 he was commissioned to create a
portal for a museum in Paris, inspired by Dante’s _The Inferno_. Many
of his other works were derived from small reliefs in the gates, such
as a man, envisioned as Dante himself, sitting in deep thought. For 10
points, name this French sculptor who created works such as The Gates
of Hell, The Kiss, and The Thinker. {One Hundred Years of Solitude} In
the first chapter of this novel, one of the protagonist’s family
members is thinking of his father just before being shot by the firing
squad. The protagonist reminisces about Macondo, the fictional
secluded village in Colombia that his father had helped found.
Melquíades (“mel-kee-a-days”)is a gypsy who returns to this village
every year with a new great invention, and inadvertently lures José
Arcadio Buendía (“bwen-DEE-a”) into alchemy. The novel describes the
lives of the Buendía family over a span of five generations. Name this
novel written by Gabriel Garcia Marquez (“markays”). {Guatemala} Lake
Atitlan (“a-teet-lan”) in this country is surrounded by volcanoes and
villages ringing its shores, most only accessible by boat. The United
Fruit Company was the power behind a number of pro-American dictators
during the 20th century. The former capital of Antigua has many ruins
from prior earthquakes. Name this Central American country bordered by
Mexico and Belize to the north, and El Salvador and Honduras to the
south, with capital at its eponymous city. King {Henry VIII} (prompt
on Henry) The Dutch theologian Erasmus thought very highly of him
although they only met a handful of times. His two sisters became the
Queens of France and Scotland, although one was later remarried to the
Duke of Suffolk. This man was a descendant of both York and
Lancastrian monarchs, through his York mother and his Lancastrian-
descended grandmother. Two of his daughters were imprisoned for a time
after his death, and his sole male heir, Edward the Sixth, died young.
In his later years, this man had a waist with a girth of 137
centimeters, and his figure can be seen in the portrait by Holbein
(“hole- bine”). For ten points, name this king of England, father of
Queens Mary I and Elizabeth I and famous for his six wives and their
various fates. {Coldplay} This band performed a few of its songs at
Steve Jobs’ memorial service held by Apple. One of their most popular
songs contains the lines “I came along / I wrote a song for you,” and
they recently released their album Mylo Xylot (“mile-o zile-ot”) . For
10 points, name this British band with lead vocalist Chris Martin
which is famous for songs like “Speed of Sound” and “Viva la Vida.”
{Portrait of Madame X} The title subject of this work is posing next
to a circular wooden table. The subject is the wife of Pierre Gautreau
(“goe-troe”), and she is wearing a dark colored satin dress with
jeweled straps against her very pale skin. The background is at the
same time contrasting her skin while illuminating her dress. Her body
is turned forward while her head is at a profile. Name this scandalous
portrait by John Singer Sargent. {Rwanda} Called “The Land of a
Thousand Hills,” it is bordered by Uganda, Burundi, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and Tanzania. It was a colony of Belgium prior
to independence after it was removed from German hands by the League
of Nations. After President Habyarimana’s (hab-yar-ee-mana’s”) plane
was shot down in 1994, Hutus (“hoo-toos”) attacked Tutsis (“tu-tsees”)
in a genocide of over a million people. Name this central African
nation with capital in Kigali. {Babbitt} In this novel, Myra meets the
titular character in college. Vergil Gunch is one of the protagonist’s
fellow Booster’s Club members. Paul Reisling and the protagonist go on
a trip to Maine alone, but are joined by their families after a week.
The titular character resolves to stop smoking, succeeds for a day,
and forgets. The novel is set in Zenith, where the titular character
lives in a house not unlike every other house in his neighborhood.
Name this novel about George, a realtor, not a real-estate man, by
Sinclair Lewis. {Donald Duck} His middle name is Fauntleroy, which
appeared in a World War II vintage cartoon. He made his debut in 1934
in “The Wise Little Hen,” voiced originally by Clarence Nash. He is
known for his short temper and his blue sailor suit. Name this Walt
Disney animated character, the uncle of Huey, Louie, and Dewey,
boyfriend to Daisy, and friendly rival to Mickey Mouse. Thomas
Jonathon {Jackson} or {Stonewall Jackson } His tactics to surround and
defeat the Union Army's right side at Chancellorsville is legendary.
His campaign in 1862 led to his troops’ reputation as "foot cavalry"
for their ability to move long distances so quickly. The largest bas-
relief sculpture in the world at Stone Mountain features this Civil
War general along with Robert E. Lee and Jefferson Davis. For ten
points, name this Confederate general, whose nickname given at the
First Battle of Bull Run is Stonewall. ANSWER:{ Pi} In 1882, Ferdinand
von Lindemann proved that this number is a transcendental number, and
that it is not a root of any polynomial equation with rational
coefficients. This proof verified that squaring the circle by compass
and straightedge could never be solved. Name this number, the ratio of
the circumference to the diameter of a circle. {Friday} Created by Ark
Music Factory, this music video shows the main character and lead
singer waking up to go to school and meeting her friends on the way.
After school, they travel to a party in a convertible, and she sings
with the help of the pitch-correcting software Autotune. after this
song went viral in March 2011, it became one of the most reviled
videos on Youtube. For 10 points, name this infamous song sung by
Rebecca Black which has the same name as a day of the week. Ludwig
{Boltzmann} Identify the scientists whose eponymous equations are used
to define stellar temperature scales.  a) This equation defining
excitation temperature gives the ratio of the number of atoms in two
different energy states in terms of the number of degenerate states
and his eponymous factor. Name the scientist. Leo {Tolstoy} One this
author’s famous characters gradually deteriorates from a fatal illness
and comes to realize the worthlessness of his artificial life versus
the authentic life of his empathetic caretaker Gerasim. Gandhi was
influenced by this author’s book about nonviolent resistance: The
Kingdom of God is Within You. On his deathbed, this author is reputed
to have rejected embracing religion and reconciling with the Russian
Orthodox Church by stating: “Even in the valley of the shadow of
death, two and two do not make six.” He was portrayed by Christopher
Plummer in the 2009 film about his final year: The Last Station. For
10 points, name this Russian author of the novella The Death of Ivan
Ilyich and his most famous novels, Anna Karenina and War and Peace.
{Aegisthus }(“AY-gis-thus”) This person was born from the incestuous
union between Thyestes (“thigh-es- tees”) and his daughter Pelopia,
and he was adopted by Atreus, Pelopia’s official husband and uncle. He
took no part in the Trojan War and ultimately killed Atreus in order
to restore power to Thyestes. For ten points, name this man who
famously had an affair with Queen Clytemnestra and later murdered her
husband, King Agamemnon, upon his return from the Trojan War. Mount
{Kilimanjaro} The Chagga people live near this mountain and gave it
its name. The second peak is known as Mawenzi, once known as Hans
Meyer Peak, but the highest peak of this massive volcano is called
Uhuru, The snow at the top has been dwindling away, but recent
research suggests that this was caused by solar radiation over the
last few centuries, not just global warming. Well described by
Hemingway in a famous story, this mountain straddles Tanzania and
Kenya. Name this tallest mountain of Africa. {Heme } or {Hemoglobin} )
Its internal porphyrin ring bonds a central metallic atom within four
nitrogen atoms. Its breakdown by the body results in bilirubin, which
is secreted by the biliary system. It is most often associated with
the oxygen and carbon dioxide transport systems in vertebrates, and is
capable of performing this function because carbon dioxide binds along
the peripheral protein structure, avoiding competition with oxygen for
bonding with the central iron atom. Surrounded by four globular
protein subunits in most mammals, name this protein constituent or
this complete protein found in erythrocytes, the oxygen carrying
component of red blood cells. Giovanni {Boccaccio }(“bo-CACH-ee-oe”) )
In this author’s most famous work, seven women and three men in a
countryside villa tell ten stories per day over ten days during a two
week sojourn, with time off for work and the Sabbath. The themes of
the day are determined by a rotating King or Queen of the day and
Dionio always recounts the last tale of the day due to his great wit.
Name the author of this work set at the time of the Black Death, but
written in 1370, which is entitled the Decameron. Dwight D.
{Eisenhower} Although he sent Army troops to desegregate Central High
School in Little Rock, he generally avoided supporting the Civil
Rights movement. In his Chance for Peace speech, he warned against the
encroaching military industrial complex overwhelming us today. He
defeated Adlai Stevenson twice in the 1952 and 1956 elections, running
with Richard Nixon and using the slogan, "Vote for Ike." Name this
Supreme Allied Commander of Europe in World War II and 34th chief
executive. {Meiji Ishin }or {Meiji Restoration}(or synonyms of
restoration like Reform or Revolution or Renewal) This event resulted
in the creation of the short lived Republic of Ezo (AY- zoe) on the
island of Hokkaido. This event was precipitated by the knowledge that
the Japanese needed to modernize to deal with incursions from the
colonial powers. This event in 1868 marked the end of the Tokugawa
Shogunate and the restoration of power in a new emperor who was
committed to changing Japan from a feudal society to a capitalist
economy with Western influences. Aaron {Rodgers} This quarterback
holds the record at University of California Berkley with the lowest
pass interception record at just 14%. He continues to hold the NFL's
lowest career pass interception percentage during the regular season.
He was drafted 24th overall in the 2005 draft, and in 2008 he took
over the starting position from Brett Favre. Name this Super Bowl 45
winning quarterback from the Green Bay Packers. {Washington Crossing
the Delaware} (DO NOT accept: George Washington Crossing the Delaware)
This painting depicts a scene set at night with pieces of ice floating
around a boat. Several soldiers and officers are in a vessel,
preparing for a surprise attack, with one person carrying the American
flag. Name this 1851 painting that shows an event occurring shortly
before the Battle of Trenton, painted by the German American artist
Emanuel Leutze (pronounced LOYTSEH). {El Cid}Campeador (or Rodrigo
{Diaz }de Vivar) He served Sancho II and Alfonso VI and was exiled
after an unauthorized incursion to Granada. He functioned as a
mercenary for the Moorish ruler of Zaragoza (“tha-ra-GO-tha”). At the
battle of Valencia, his wife Jimena (“hee- MAY-nah”) placed his corpse
on his horse Babieca (“ba-bee-AY-ka”) in order to maintain the morale
of the troops. His sword Tizona (“tee-THOE-na”) is on display at the
Museum of Burgos. Name this Castilian nobleman and military leader who
is considered a national hero of Spain. David {Hume} In one of this
man’s most famous works, he omitted a controversial part on miracles
in order to please Bishop Butler. Books I and II of that work were
published anonymously. His posthumously published Dialogues Concerning
Natural Religion questioned whether the discovery of religious truth
could answer questions about the nature of God. Immanuel Kant remarked
that this man woke him from his “dogmatic slumbers”. Name this
Scottish skeptic who, for 10 points, authored A Treatise of Human
Nature. Elizabeth Cady {Stanton} Collaborating with Susan B. Anthony
and Matilda Joslyn Gage, this woman helped write the first three
volumes of the History of Woman Suffrage. She was a primary organizer
for the 1848 Women’s Rights Convention and for the convention outlined
a Declaration of Sentiments. For 10 points, name the woman who co-
founded the National Woman’s Suffrage Association that later merged
into the National American Women Suffrage Association, of which she
became its first president. Frida {Kahlo }(Magdalena Carmen Frida{
Kahlo }y Calderon{)} A famous self portrait shows a cat on her left
shoulder, a monkey at her right shoulder and a necklace of thorns with
a bird pendant. In another work, we see a woman falling from an
apartment building and lying dead on the ground in the foreground.
This painting is entitled  Suicide of Dorothy Hale. This painter
prepared to study medicine before a bus accident derailed her career
plans; the mental and physical pains that resulted from the accident
are continuous themes in her work. Name this wife of painter Diego
Rivera, also a noted artist who straddled surrealism and Mexican folk
art. Archangel {Raphael } Going by the pseudonym Azarias, this
biblical figure heals Tobit of his blindness in this Book of the
Apocrypha. Many people also associate him with the “angel of the pond”
mentioned by John in his Gospel. In Islam, he is responsible for
sounding the trumpet in anticipation of Judgement Day. He is one of
the only three archangels to be mentioned by name in the Bible. For
ten points, name this archangel that is also the patron saint of
travelling and healing , who also shares his name with the artist who
painted The School of Athens. {Madonna of the Rocks}or {Virgin of the
Rocks} This oil painting on wood panel was completed in the late 15th
century, with the assistance of Evangelista and Ambrosio de Predis.
Although one version can be seen in the Louvre, a second version with
almost identical composition was created and is now on display in the
National Gallery at London. Both depict a woman in blue in the center
of the panel, holding her left hand out towards a seated baby at the
feet of angel Gabriel. Her right hand ushers John the Baptist forward
towards the seated Jesus. Name this painting by Leonard da Vinci,
featured in Dan Brown’s The DaVinci Code showing the Virgin Mary
kneeling beside a rocky stream. {mithril} Discovered in the mines of
Khazad-dum by the Dwarves, this metal is described as untarnishable
with a bright silver color. It is unlike steel due to its greater
strength and its much lighter weight. A coat made out of this metal is
given to Frodo Baggins, which later saved his life during an encounter
with the Orcs. For ten points, name this metal which appears in many
role playing video games such as Runescape and World of Warcraft  .
{Multiple Sclerosis} The diagnosis of this disease is confirmed by
finding oligoclonal bands of IgG (“eye-jee-jee”) in the cerebrospinal
fluid. This autoimmune disease is about five times more likely in
temperate zones like the US and Europe than in tropical zones, and the
highest rates are seen in Scotland and Ireland. It is also found more
commonly in Caucasians than in any other race. Symptoms are usually
acquired after the age of 30 and include muscle rigidity, numbness,
fatigue, clumsiness, and particularly difficulty walking. For ten
points, name this demyelinating disease of the central nervous system,
which disrupts neuronal transmission.. James K. {Polk} This man joined
Congress at the age of 29 as a Tennessee representative. After being
reelected five times to the House of Representatives, he became the
chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee and later Speaker of
the House and Governor of Tennessee. In 1844, he defeated Henry Clay,
the Whig candidate for President, by promising to annex Texas. In
1848, he accepted the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, which added
California, Nevada, Arizona, New Mexico, and Utah territories to the
US. For 10 points, name the only president of the United States who
had been House Speaker, the 11th President. ANSWER:{ Princeton}
University When you exit the University Store located on campus near
Nassau Street, you may hear an a cappella group performing an “arch
sing” at Blair Arch. Ian Caldwell set his novel The Rule of Four at
this university, his alma mater, and part of the action occurs at Ivy
Club, one of the ten Eating Clubs. Frist Campus Center stands in as
the hospital in the opening sequences of the TV show “House.” Name
this Ivy League University whose school colors are orange and black
and is located in New Jersey. L. Frank{ Baum} He established his
famous collaboration with W. W. Denslow for the publication Father
Goose, His Book, which was a sequel to his successful Mother Goose, In
Prose. After he died in 1919, Ruth Plumly Thompson created subsequent
sequels to his most famous series. His sixth book follows the
diabolical plot of the Nome King Roquat as he schemes to destroy the
realms of Queen Ozma. Name this author of the 14 books of the Land of
Oz series, the first of which is The Wonderful Wizard of Oz.
{Glacier}National Park The water from Triple Divide Point in this
National park will drain to the Pacific Ocean on the west side, the
Atlantic Ocean via the Mississippi on the south and east side, and the
Arctic Ocean via Hudson Bay on the north side. The tallest peak is
Mount Cleveland and prominent lakes include McDonald, Two Medicine,
and St. Mary. Its most famous features may disappear by 2030 if global
warming persists. Name this National park in Montana, which features
landforms shaped by rivers of ice. M. C.{Escher} In one of his works,
a small village with a waterwheel and an aqueduct appear in the
center. In the background of this work is terraced farmland and at the
bottom are strange large plants. He depicts water flowing in a
paradoxical fashion in this work entitled “Waterfall.” In other
prints, he employed a Necker cube, a Penrose triangle, and
tessellations. Name this Dutch artist famous for works such as Drawing
Hands, Sky and Water, and Ascending and Descending. {The Who} This
band wrote and performed the opening theme songs for all three CSI TV
shows. This rock band, formed in 1964, rose to fame with a hit single
“I Can’t Explain” and with their debut album My Generation.  Their
live performances often included instrument destruction, most notably
in 1967, when Roger Daltrey blew up the band’s amps after the end of a
song. For 10 points name this English rock band started by Roger
Daltrey, Pete Townshend, John Entwistle, and Keith Moon. The {Lord
Chamberlain’s Men} This group was originally based in the Shoreditch
area but moved in 1598 to Southwark after conflicts with the
landowner. Prominent in London, the group was supported by such
patrons as Henry Carey and later King James I. After Henry Carey’s
death in 1596, they temporarily took on the name “Lord Hunsdon’s Men”
after his son George Carey, 2nd Baron Hunsdon. After George was
promoted, this acting troupe, returned to its original name in honor
of George Carey’s new position. Name this group assembled by James
Burbage in 1594 and known best for employing William Shakespeare and
holding exclusive rights to performing his plays. {Game-Winning RBI}
or {Game-Winning Run Batted In} The Elias Sports Bureau devised it as
a means to quantify clutch hitting, but it was later removed from box
scores because it could occur in any inning and did not usually come
in clutch situations. Although walk-off home runs are an example of
it, even lead-off homeruns could also be counted as this. Name this
baseball statistic, which has fallen into disfavor, that is credited
to the batter who drives in the run that gives his team the lead for
good. {Molotov }Cocktail This name was derived during the Winter War
when the Finns employed this weapon to disable Soviet tanks. The name
mocked this namesake People's Commissar for Foreign Affairs after he
claimed that they were not bombing the Finnish, but delivering food to
the starving people. The Finns responded by throwing this mixture at
Soviet tanks "to go with the food." Eventually the Finnish alcohol
giant ALKO mass produced them. For ten points, name this term, now
used to describe generic improvised incendiary weapons. William
{Golding} When this author won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1983,
it was based off the strength of such works as his Rites of Passage,
which was the first book in the To The Ends of the Earth trilogy. In
The Inheritors, another work by this author, the Neanderthals are
driven to extinction by the Homo sapiens. Name this British author
famous for his first novel about young boys stranded on an island
written in 1954, entitled Lord of the Flies. Paul {Gauguin} A woman
attempted to tear down one of this man’s paintings in the National
Gallery in 2011 due to the nudity. This artist was a sailor and
stockbroker before he took to painting full time in a post-
Impressionist style. He led the Synthetism movement of natural forms
and feelings with works such as Vision After the Sermon and The Yellow
Christ. This artist suffered bouts of depression and sought a tropical
paradise which he found in Tahiti and finally the Marquesas Islands.
For 10 points, name this artist who famously painted primitive scenes
of women such as Two Tahitian Women and Where Do We Come From? What
Are We? Where Are We Going?. {Eris} During Peleus and Thetis’s wedding
reception, this Greek goddess is reputedly responsible for tossing the
Golden Apple inscribed with Kallisti (to the fairest one) toward
Paris. This Greek goddess of strife or Discordia (in Latin) is also
the name for the largest known body in the Kuiper (“KYE-per”) Belt,
eclipsing even the size of Pluto. Name this goddess whose counterpart
is Harmonia or Concordia (in Latin). {Gauss’s }Law If the electric
charge distribution is known, this law can determine the electric
field only if the field passes through the surface in a uniform,
symmetric fashion as found in a sphere, planar surface, or a cylinder.
If the electric field is known at all points, the electric charge can
be calculated by integrating the electric field to find the flux. The
more commonly used integral form is related to the differential form
through the divergence. Name this law by a German mathematician that
is one of the four Maxwell’s equations, which involves placing an
imaginary surface around electric charges. {Firewall }{( }Great
{Firewall} of China) For auto mechanics, this term refers to the
barrier between the passenger and engine compartments of a vehicle.
For architects, it is the side of a building containing no windows and
reinforced with thicker material for safety considerations. In
computer science, this term refers to any software or hardware used in
a network environment to restrict or control communication between
computers. Name this term also used as part of a nickname to describe
China’s censoring of the internet instead of the Golden Shield
Project. William Jennings {Bryan} He was against national aggression,
and resigned as Secretary of State after the Lusitania was sunk by a
German torpedo inducing President Woodrow Wilson to make strong
demands on Germany. He was in opposition to Darwinism and helped the
prosecution in the Scopes Trial. For ten points, name this Democratic
politician known as the “Great Commoner,” who is famous for his "Cross
of Gold" speech and for running for President unsuccessfully three
times. {Mormonism} or The Church of Jesus Christ of the {Latter-Day
Saints} One of the sacred texts of this religion was translated from
plates buried at Cumorah Hill. The founder of this religion dug up two
stones fastened to a breastplate and referred to these objects as Urim
and Thummim. The prophet Moroni wrote these golden plates and,
appearing as an angel, later instructed the founder of this religion
to uncover them in present day New York. The second leader of this
religion would later establish Salt Lake City. Founded by Joseph
Smith, Jr., and by Brigham Young in the 1800s, name this religion, the
predominant religion in the state of Utah. King {Saul} He and his
three sons died at the battle with the Philistines at Mount Gilboa. He
disobeyed the prophet Samuel when he refused to kill every living
human and animal after defeating the Amalekites. He was king of Israel
when the young David slew Goliath. Name this first King of a united
Israel after the Period of Judges, the predecessor to King David. The
{Sun} (accept {Sol}) This celestial object is classified as a G2V
spectral class and is located within the inner rim of the Orion arm of
the Milky Way galaxy, orbiting the galactic center every 250 million
years. Composed of 73% hydrogen and 24% helium, it is nonetheless
relatively rich in heavy metals. The majority of recent scientific
data about this celestial object has come from the European SOHO
mission. This object can affect the Earth, interfering with radio
communications and causing auroras. This object is located exactly one
astronomical unit from Earth. Name this star previously thought to
orbit the earth but now known to be the center of our solar system.
Eero {Saarinen} One of his residential works, the Miller House, opened
to the public for the first time in 2011 after being donated to the
Indianapolis Museum of Art. His design for Hill College House at the
University of Pennsylvania included a fallout shelter due to its
construction at the height of the Cold War. He designed Kresge (“kres-
gee”) Auditorium and the adjacent chapel at MIT, the main terminal at
Dulles Airport, and the TWA Flight Center at JFK Airport. Name this
Finnish-American architect who may be best known for St. Louis’s
landmark Gateway Arch. Daniel {Bernoulli} After publishing his first
mathematical work, Exercitationes, in Venice, he accepted a
mathematics professorship at the St. Petersburg Academy . In his most
famous work, the Hydrodynamica, he attempted to formulate a kinetic
theory of gases. While he was born to a family of prominent Swiss
mathematicians, his most famous contributions were made in physics and
particularly fluid dynamics. For ten points, name this 18th century
scholar, whose namesake principle states that the pressure of a fluid
decreases as the speed of the fluid increases. Dame Judi [Judith]
{Dench} This actress appears as J. Edgar Hoover’s domineering mother,
Annie, in the biopic J. Edgar starring Leonardo DiCaprio. For over a
decade this actress starred as Jean Mary Pargetter Hardcastle in As
Time Goes By co-starring Sir Geoffrey Palmer, which appeared on BBC
America and even now on PBS (especially around pledge drives). She has
played the part of Queen Victoria in Mrs. Brown and Queen Elizabeth I
in Shakespeare in Love, for which she won an Academy Award for Best
Supporting Actress. Name this British actress knighted by Queen
Elizabeth in 1988, who has been cast as M in the last 6 James Bond
films. {Alcohol(s) } This group of chemical compounds may be
synthesized by sodium borohydride reduction of  aldehydes or ketones,
while Grignard (“Grin-yard”) reagent substitution at the carbonyl
group can  produce only the secondary and tertiary types. Those with
at least five carbons are commonly used  as solvents due to their
miscibility with non-polar substances, despite the potential formation
of hydrogen  bonds at the characteristic hydroxyl group. For ten
points, name these compounds, which include a  methyl variety used for
vehicular fuel, an isopropyl form commonly used in antiseptics, and an
ethyl or  “grain” type used in adult beverages. {Metropolis} . In this
movie, Freder, the son of the supreme ruler of the city, falls in love
with Maria, a beautiful woman of the working class. In this movie,
Rotwang, a mad scientist, creates a robot version of Maria in order to
incite a worker’s revolution and destroy the city. The film is set in
a dystopian world where the lower classes toil underground as the
wealthy live above. For ten points, name this classic silent film with
Expressionist and Art Deco sets released in 1927 directed and written
by Fritz Lang. {Vlad} the III or {Vlad the Impaler}, or {Vlad Tepes}
{(}accept {Vlad)} In 1456, he established Tirgoviste as his capital
city upon reaching the throne. Previously in 1442, this man and his
younger brother were held hostages in Adrianople by the Ottomans in
order to secure their father's fealty. His army killed over 50,000
Turks and Bulgars, but he was ultimately defeated by his brother,
Radu, who had defected to the Ottomans. Name this ruler of Wallachia
and Transylvania, known for his methods of execution, who served as
the inspiration for Bram Stoker's Dracula. {Waiting for Godot} [or {En
attendant Godot}] In this work, a character gnaws on a stranger’s
leftover chicken bones. Another character is on his way to sell his
slave after almost 60 years of service. The phrase “Nothing to be
done” is repeated throughout. The second act includes a scene in which
the two main characters rapidly switch hats, and later Pozzo comes in
as a blind man with his slave, Lucky, leading him. Vladimir and
Estragon are two men who are looking forward to the arrival of a third
character in, for 10 points, this absurdist play by Samuel Beckett.
Maurice {Ravel} Some claim that this composer, who died after
neurosurgery for an old head injury, suffered from frontotemporal
dementia while composing some of his later works. He is known for his
orchestration of Daphnis and Chloe commissioned by Diaghilev (“dya-
gill-off”), his orchestral arrangement of Mussorgsky's Pictures at an
Exhibition, and his Rapsodie Espagnole. Though 12 years younger than
Claude Debussy (de-boo-SEE), he and Debussy were considered the avant-
garde of French music at the turn of the 20th century. Name this
French Impressionist composer best known for his work first titled
Fandango, but later called Bolero. {Baldr} (or {Baldur} or {Balder)}
His wife Nanna threw herself on his funeral pyre, which was placed on
his great ship, Hringhorni (“ring-horny”). He and his mother Frigga
both had dreams of his impending death, so Frigga asked all objects on
Earth to vow never to hurt him. Loki created a spear out of the only
object which had forgone the vow, which he gave to the blind god Hoor.
For ten points, name this second son of Odin, who was inadvertently
slain by his blind brother through the machinations of Loki with a
spear made from mistletoe. The Battle of {Midway} This battle saw the
second engagement of the USS Yorktown, which had sustained severe
damage during the Battle of Coral Sea one month earlier. This battle
started as a Japanese plan to lure American forces into a trap. Thanks
to advanced warning by superior intelligence gathering, Admiral Nimitz
only lost one American Carrier and one American Destroyer, while four
enemy carriers and an enemy heavy cruiser were destroyed. Led by the
Enterprise and by the ultimately doomed Yorktown, this decisive
American victory came almost exactly six months after the attack on
Pearl Harbor. For ten points, name this military engagement that saw
United States Naval forces protect an outer Hawaiian atoll with the
titular American base. Giuseppe {Garibaldi} He gained much fame for
his 1860 campaign, capturing Palermo in Sicily, against the larger
army of the Neopolitan general Ferdinando Lanza. While defending Rome
against the future Napoleon III, he wrote the book Cantoni il
Volontario. Dubbed as ‘Hero of the Two Worlds’ for his military
expeditions in both Uruguay and Italy, for ten points, name this man
who is considered an Italian national hero for his work in the
Risorgimento, or the Italian unification movement of the nineteenth
century. {I and the Village} In this painting, the background features
an upside down woman playing the violin, next to a man holding a
scythe. In this painting, the man is looking at a goat, whose cheek
contains a woman milking another goat. Behind them is a row of houses
and a church. The tree that the man with the green face is holding is
at the center bottom of this painting. The overlapping images evoke
the stream of memories triggered by the man’s image of the goat. For
ten points, name this painting which depicts these memories of growing
up Jewish in a rural Russian community by Marc Chagall. {Gobi} Desert
The Alashan Plateau is located to the southwest of its eastern
steppes, while the Tian Shan range separates its Dzungarian Basin from
the Taklamakan Desert to its west. Species that live within this
region include Takhi, which are wild horses, as well as the Ibex,
which can be found in the Altai Mountains that border parts of this
region. The notable two-humped wild Bactrian camel can also be found
in this region, which has an average elevation that is more than 1000
feet above sea level. Roy Chapman Andrews conducted expeditions in
this arid area, where he discovered the first velociraptor skeleton
and first dinosaur eggs. For ten points, name this largest desert in
Asia, located in southern Mongolia and northern China. ANSWER:{Venus}
The phases he observed on this planet supported Galileo’s heliocentric
model of the solar system. In 1962, Mariner 2 became the first
interplanetary spacecraft when it reached this destination. A
prominent surface feature mapped by the Magellan spacecraft in the
1990s is a 200 mile long river of hardened lava. This planet is seen
in many cultures as the morning or evening star, since it is the
brightest object in the sky when present during dawn and sunset. Name
this planet which shares its name with the Roman counterpart of
Aphrodite. ANSWER:{ Idaho} At Caldron Linn Canyon in this state, the
Snake River is forced through a passage less than 40 feet wide. The
highest peak, Mount Borah, is adjacent to the Challis fault line, the
source of major earthquake activity. The Sun Valley ski resort is the
state's most famous alpine destination. Nez Perce National Historical
Park encompasses parts of Montana, Oregon, Washington, and this state.
For ten points, name this northwestern landlocked state, nicknamed the
Gem State and often associated with potatoes, with capital at Boise.
{Marcus Aurelius} A copy of his equestrian statue dominates the
Campidoglio (“camp-ee-DOE- lee-oh”) in Rome. After the death of
Antoninus Pius, he served as co-emperor with Lucius Verus for 8 years.
Several of his young children with Faustina, the daughter of
Antoninus, were buried in Hadrian’s Mausoleum. The early part of his
reign was concerned with the Parthians, while later conflicts dealt
with the Germanic tribes. He is most well known for his writings on
Stoic Philosophy entitled Meditations. Name this last of the Five Good
Emperors of Rome, the father of Commodus,  whose death early in the
movie Gladiator impels its later events. Gregory VII (prompt on
Hildebrand before mention) That the Church failed to get the input of
the German emperor proved an accurate omen for this pope's contentious
relations with the Holy Roman Empire. In his conflicts with the
emperor he found allies in the princes of Germany who desired a
religious justification for combating imperial centralization; the
emperor allied himself with bishops who resented the growing papal
power and many of whom had been appointed by the emperor, the basis
for the lay investiture controversy. FTP name this great reforming
pope whose most famous confrontation with Henry IV was in the snows of
Canossa and who was formerly known as  Cardinal Hildebrand. My Antonia
In one episode in this novel, Will Cutter mercilessly beats the
narrator when he finds him sleeping in one character’s bed, and
another episode involves a small feud between families over a loaned
horse collar and a debt on a milk cow. Characters in this novel
include an Austrian hired hand that looks like a cowboy, Otto Fuchs;
the title character’s arrogant brother, Ambrosch; the flirtatious
Norwegian dressmaker, Lena Lingard; and the eventual husband of the
title character, Cuzak. FTP, Jim Burden narrates the story of his
childhood in Black Hawk, Nebraska and his love for the title daughter
of the Bohemian immigrant family, the Shimerdas, in what novel by
Willa Cather? The Matrix In its original form it was designed to
provide ultimate bliss to everyone who interacted with it, but users
found it too unbelievable. Despite currently being in it's sixth
version. Bugs persist in the form of rogue programs and the systematic
emergence of an integral anomaly. That anomaly usually chooses to
return to the Source and reinsert the prime program, but because of
love, instead chooses to risk the extinction of the human race.
Created by The Architect to pacify humans while they are used as an
energy source,  FTP Lawrence Fishburne as Morpheus awakens a Keanu
Reeves-played Neo from what simulation of life  in a 1999 Wachowski
brothers movie that saw sequals "Reloaded" and "Revolutions" Frederick
I  or Barbarossa Some of the provisions of the Peace of Constance this
man signed with the pope Eugene III were to defend the papacy and make
no peace with Roger II of Sicily. This man helped Adrian IV suppress
the Roman Commune of Arnold of Brescia, after which he was crowned
emperor. Suffering a heavy defeat at the battle of Legnano to the
forces of the Lombard League, this man was ultimately unsuccessful in
his numerous attempts to control Italy. A Duke of Swabia before he
became Holy Roman Emperor, this man  is perhaps most famous for the
way he died in route to the Third Crusade. FTP, identify this man
nicknamed “Red Beard,” who drowned while crossing a river.
electrophoresis  1 This technique is commonly described by the
Smoluchowski theory, which seeks to explain movement  of the dispersed
particles independent of their shape but fails if the double layer is
too thick. A zymogram can be used to detect enzyme activity in one
variant of it, while the zone type utilizes isoelectric focusing to
separate molecules based on their electric charge with respect to pH
changes. Gene sequencing and protein separation can be done with the
SDS-PAGE variety. FTP, name this electrokinetic technique often
completed in agarose gel. George Bernard Shaw This playwright’s first
success was set during the Revolutionary War and sees the titular
apostate, Dick Dudgeon, let himself be arrested instead of the
minister, Anthony Anderson, The Devil’s Disciple. The title character
of another play by this author, wishes to marry Adolphus Cusins,
disapproves of her father, Andrew Undershaft’s armament manufacturing
and is a member of the Salvation Army. While another play sees Colonel
Pickering bet with Henry Higgins that the latter can’t turn Eliza
Doolittle into a lady through elocution lessons. FTP, this is what
Irish playwright of Major Barbara  and Pygmalion? glycine It can be
degraded to pyruvate via intermediary formation of serine via the
action of serine  hydroxymethyltransferase, and its combination with
succinyl-CoA allows for the production of the  porphyrins precursor
d-aminolevulinic acid. It is needed as a co-agonist with glutamate for
NMDA  receptors, and it is one of the major components of collagen
along with the amino acid proline. The chief inhibitory
neurotransmitter of the spinal cord, FTP, names this smallest amino
acid which is optically inactive due to its single hydrogen side
chain. Sergei Prokofiev The third piano sonata by this composer is a
single-movement work in A minor that begins with repeated E major
chords, and his seventh piano sonata features a precipitato final
movement in 7/8 time. He wrote a flute sonata in D, opus 94, and in
one of his operas the Prince and Truffaldino discover the princess
Ninnetta after the Prince is cursed with the title affliction by the
witch Fata Morgana. That opera is based on a play by Carlo Gozzi. In
his best- known ballet, fifteen drumbeats mark the death of one of the
main antagonists, and that ballet also features the Dance of the
Knights, also known as "Montagues and Capulets." For 10 points,
identify this Russian composer of The Love for Three Oranges, the
ballet Romeo and Juliet, and a "Classical" Symphony. Otto von Bismarck
This man's early career included appointments as ambassador to Russia
and France, but he was recalled to his home country to act as prime
minister when the parliament refused to fund a proposed reorganization
of his country's famous army. This man, who had a World War II
battleship named after him, conquered Schleswig and Holstein from
Denmark and then contrived a dispute over those territories with a
victory at Sadowa. Although he earned domestic ire by restricting
freedom of the press and launching the anti-Catholic Kulturkampf, he
took up the liberal mantle of national unification with a decidedly
more martial Realpolitik twist, declaring that "the great questions of
the time will not be resolved by speeches and majority decision--that
was the great mistake of 1848 and 1849--but by blood and iron." FTP,
name this minister who published the Ems Dispatch that started the
Franco-Prussian war and become the Iron  Chancellor of the German
empire he united. combustion reactions In solid compounds, this class
of reactions occurs in three distinct phases in which preheating leads
to a second distillation stage. At the molecular level, these types of
reactions can only be initiated if a heat- induced spin-paired state
is achieved, which subsequently reacts to produce the heat that
propagates the reaction. Certain types require consideration of the
air to fuel ratio, while liquid fuels used in these have to above the
flash point temperature. They come in complete, incomplete, and
smoldering forms, and are used in devices like the calorimeter and
diesel engine. FTP, name this reaction type in which a hydrocarbon
reacts with oxygen to form carbon dioxide and water. James Barrie  2
In one of several novels by this author set in Thrums, Gavin Dishart
is the titular priest of the Auld Licht parish, The Little Minister.
When the Lasenbys are shipwrecked on a deserted island in one play by
this author, the titular butler is revealed to be the only one with
practical knowledge and becomes ruler.  That is The Admirable
Crichton.  Characters in his most famous novel include Tootles, the
Indian princess Tiger Lily, and the Darling children. FTP, the titular
little boy won’t grow up and fights Captain Hook in what Scottish
author’s Peter Pan? Iran The eighteenth-largest country in the world,
this nation of over 70 million inhabitants is bordered by Armenia,
Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan to the north. Before Islam arrived in the
seventh century, two  ruling empires here included the Parthians and
the Sassanids. Notable tourist attractions here include the cities of
Isfahan, Qom, Shiraz and Tabriz. The US does not currently operate an
embassy, following a 1979  revolution in this nation. Formerly known
as Persia, FTP, name this Middle Eastern country, whose  supreme
leader is Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, and whose president is Mahmoud
Ahmadinejad. William Carlos Williams The title poem of one collection
by this author describes plants like the “twiggy stuff of bushes” and
the  “wildcarrot leaf” as they “grip down and begin to awaken”. While
the most famous poem of another  collection describes the “tweedle of
bagpipes” and the “kicking and rolling about” in the titular painter’s
“The Kermess’. Those are the collections Spring and All  and Pictures
from Breughel. But his most anthologized poems describe an implement
that “so much depends upon” and apologize for eating “the  plums /
that were in / the icebox”. FTP, name this New Jerseyite poet of “The
Read Wheelbarrow”  and  “This is Just Say”. The Ambassadors This
painting was the only one signed in full by the artist, and in between
the central characters lies a floor mosaic based on the patterns on
Westminster Abbey. On a shelf sits a polyhedral sundial, and a lute
with a broken string sits next to a Lutheran hymnal. On the floor
between the titular figures is a blob of gray paint which, when
tilted, is shown to be an anamorphic skull. FTP, name this Hans
Holbein the  Younger painting which shows the two titular figures from
France at the court of Henry VIII. Indra He is known as Sakra in
Buddhist and Jain texts, and is related to other Indo-European gods
like Zeus, Perun and Thor. He is the brother of Agni, and hence the
son of Dyaus Pitar. His greatest enemy is the serpent Vritra, who
traps all the waters of the world, and whom this god slays with the
help of the drink Soma. His weapon is the thunderbolt, and his mount
is the albino elephant Airavata. Although his position declined in
modern Hinduism with the emergence of the Trimurti, this god is still
an important symbol of rulership. For ten points, name this husband of
Sachi, the head of the Vedic pantheon. Hooke's law It can be
thermodynamically demonstrated by assuming that the processes which
this law characterizes are adiabatic. In another formulation, it
yields the necessary potential energy to perform that process on a
material over any distance. For forces below a material's yield
strength, it provides approximations of linear deformations and
Young's modulus divides the two variables present in it. FTP, "stress
is proportional to strain" is the common formulation of what law by an
English scientist that models the motion of springs? Joseph Conrad
This author first novel follows the titular Dutch trader in Borneo who
marries Captain Lingard‟s adopted Malay  daughter, in order to inherit
her wealth, Almayer’s Folly.  In another novel by this author, set in
the fictional town of Sulaco, the titular Italian miner is entrusted
with Senor Gould‟s silver, Nostromo. The mentally disabled Stevie
reveals that it was Verloc who bombed the Greenwich Observatory in
this author‟s The Secret Agent. But he is most well-known for a novel
at the end of which Marlowe lies about Kurtz‟s last words, which were
actually “The horror,  the horror”. FTP, this is what Polish-born
British novelist of Heart of Darkness? hydrogen bonds These can be
analyzed by the Burgi-Dunitz approach and are the reason for the
unique negative slope of the solid-  liquid line on water‟s phase
diagram. Dihydrogen oxide has two lone pairs and two free protons per
molecule so it  can form two of these, while ammonia can only form one
because although it has three protons it only has a single  lone pair.
These are re-formed by RAD51 and 52 in a process called annealing, and
three of these are formed  between cytosine and guanine and two
between adenine and thymine. These consist of a proton stuck in a
pickle  between two highly-electronegative atoms, namely nitrogen,
fluorine, or oxygen. FTP, name this particularly strong  intra- or
more commonly intermolecular bond that shares its name with the
lightest element. Cleveland During the last Census in 2000, this city
was found to have the thirty- third largest population in the US, but
since then, it has suffered from large population decline. The present
mayor is Frank G. Jackson, and the current Music  Director of the
city's orchestra is Franz Welser-Most. This city is located on the
banks of Lake Eire, and the  Cuyahoga River flows through it. Most
famously, this city houses the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. FTP, name
this  second largest city of Ohio, home of the Indians, the Browns and
Lebron James. Gulliver’s Travels  1 The reader is informed that twelve
cubed is 1,728 in this novel. In Part IV of this work the author is
accosted by an amorous teenage Yahoo before he is rescued by some
reasonable horses. In Part I of this work, the author is  pleased with
himself when he puts out a fire in a palace by peeing on it, though
the Empress is horrified and he is  soon forced to flee to Blefuscu.
FTP, name this novel by Jonathan Swift, which features the six-inch
tall residents of Lilliput. glaciers Fluctuations in these landmasses
have been caused in part by periodic changes in heat received by the
Sun.  During the Pleistocene Epoch, these covered 30 percent of the
world‟s land area. They primarily erode the terrain  through abrasion
and plucking, and fields of drumlins and eskers are formed by these
entities. Apart from the  oceans, they are the largest reservoir of
total water and store about three- fourths of all fresh water in the
world.  Arêtes, horns, cirques, and moraines are also shaped by these
landmasses. FTP, name these perennial masses of ice  which move over
land. Hannibal (it‟s unclear whether Barca was his father‟s nickname
or a family name, but give the  benefit of the doubt to answers of
Hannibal Barca) This general—often called the greatest strategist-
tactician of all time—succeeded to command of an army after  his
father died and his brother-in-law, who bore the same name as this
man‟s brother, was assassinated. Two of this  general‟s early
victories were at Trebia and Lake Trasimene, and his only real defeat
at Zama. FTP name this son of  Hamilcar and brother of Hasdrubal, a
Carthaginian general who won the Battle of Cannae after marching his
entire  army, including war elephants, over the Alps. white dwarf The
first one of these to be discovered was found in a triple star system.
Sirius‟s companion, Sirius B, was the  next to be identified. Known to
sometimes explode in Type Ia supernovas by carbon detonation, these
stars are  believed to be the “corpses” of low mass stars which expand
to red giants and undergo the triple-alpha process. The  “black”
variation of this star has been proposed but the idea has since been
discarded because even one of these  formed at the beginning of the
universe would still radiate at temperatures of several thousand
Kelvins. FTP, name  this dense class of stars composed of electron-
degenerate matter with a comparable mass of the Sun and the volume  of
the Earth. Waiting for Godot or En Attendant Godot One character in
this play exclaims “one day we were born, one day we shall die, the
same day” when asked  when he went blind. And a repeated line in this
play is “nothing to be done”. The play is set on a country road,
where there is tree that has miraculously grown leaves in Act II, and
which two characters discuss hanging  themselves from, only they
haven‟t any rope. One character in this play delivers a long nonsense
speech when  commanded to “speak” by a character that whips him and
calls him “hog”; they are Lucky and Pozzo. The  protagonists munch
carrots, argue, and exchange hats in, FTP, what play in which Vladimir
and Estragon try to bide  time before the arrival of the title figure
by Samuel Beckett? Lady Gaga  2 Citing Freddie Mercury as an
influence, this singer took her name from a Queen song released on the
album The  Works. She sang the hook for Wale's (wa-LAYS) song
"Chillin'" and a recording from her "Cherrytree Hill Sessions EP" was
sampled by Kanye West for the Kid Cudi track "Make Her Say." More
famous songs by this artist include one where she name-drops classic
Alfred Hitchcock films like "Psycho" "Vertigo" and "Rear Window" as
well as another about a girl who loses her keys and phone while
wondering "How'd I turn my shirt inside out?" FTP name this artist
who's debut album The Fame features the songs "Lovegame" "Papparazzi"
"Just Dance" and "Poker Face." Catch-22 One character in this novel
claims another has flies in eyes and another has screaming nightmares
and keeps  trying to photograph nude women. Besides Appleby, Hungry
Joe, and Orr, another character holds titles such as  Mayor of
Palermo, has cornered the market on Egyptian cotton but can only
dispose of it by covering it in chocolate  and feeding it to people,
and later bombs his own men to make a profit for “The Syndicate”. That
character is Milo  Minderbinder. The titular stipulation say that a
pilot can only be grounded if he‟s insane but asking to be grounded
proves your sanity in, FTP, what novel in which B-25 bombardier
Yossarian tries to stay alive by Joseph Heller? forces They are
experienced between two plates in the Casimir effect, and one form is
responsible for the breakdown of  nucleons into hadrons and leptons.
Perturbation theory was applied to the effect of one of these to
predict the orbits of the planets, while one class of them only allows
for the inter-conversion of energy between its kinetic and  potential
forms. Kaluza-Klein theory suggests that all of them fictitious,
though there is more consensus that the  centrifugal variety qualifies
as such. Occurring in tension, friction, and normal varieties as well
as strong and weak forms is FTP, this concept in physics that causes
acceleration, examples of which include gravity. William Lloyd
Garrison Appointed editor in 1828 of the National Philanthropist, a
Boston-area newspaper which was the first in the  United States to
advocate government enforcement of temperance, this political figure
took up his primary cause  after flirting with (and subsequently
completely rejecting) the American Colonization Society, an
organization  whose mission was to encourage free blacks to emigrate
to West Africa. Often resorting to such radical techniques  as burning
the US Constitution while denouncing it as a “Covenent from Hell” for
its compromises made on slavery,  for ten points, name this ardent
supporter of immediate abolitionism, the founder of The Liberator.
Gospel according to Luke It lists 20 miracles performed by Christ, and
is the only source to mention Mary Magdalene before the  crucifixion.
This text begins with a dedication to Theophilus, and it is the only
source to detail the parentage of John the Baptist. Although the
author of this text was a gentile, it is thought to draw on the Gospel
of the Hebrews, yet the majority of scholars agree that it was based
on another synoptic gospel with reference to the Q document. This
gospel is the only one to include the parables of the Prodigal Son and
the Good Samaritan, and its author also  penned the book of Acts. For
ten points, name this longest of the four canonical gospels, which
follows Mark and  precedes John. endoplasmic reticulum This organelle
typically constitutes more than half of the membrane content found in
the cell and is responsible  for making both the COPII and
mannose-6-phosphate modifications. Its association with the outer
membrane of the  nuclear envelope allows for improved rates of
signaling, though it is better known for its role in gluconeogenesis
and steroid, glycoprotein, and lipids synthesis. This organelle,
composed of an interconnected network of tubules and  cisternae, can
detoxify poisonous substances through its smooth variety. FTP, name
this organelle which contains  ribosomes in its rough type. Loki This
son of Farbauti and Laufey often takes the shape of a salmon or a
mare. He was responsible for the  abduction of Idunn by the giant
Thiassi, but returned her to the Aesir in the guise of a falcon. He
also once borrowed Freya‟s feather cloak in order to learn the
location of the stolen Mjolnir, and later helped retrieve it from the
giant Thrym disguised as Freya‟s handmaid. At the court of Utgard-
Loki, he lost an eating contest to fire, and though he  mated with the
stallion Svadilfari in order to produce Sleipnir, he is better known
for his offspring with Angrboda,  the youngest of which rules the
realm of the dead. For ten points, name this Norse god who will kill
Heimdall at  Ragnarok and who brought about Hoder‟s murder of Baldur,
the father of Fenrir. Edgar Allan Poe In work by this author, the
narrator is alerted by a servant named Jupiter that his master has
begun chasing the  treasure of Captain Kidd after being bitten by the
titular insect. This author also wrote about a member of a family
whose crest shows a snake biting the heel of a foot crushing it and
whose motto is "No one punishes me with  Impunity". Aside from short
stories like "The Gold Bug"  and "The Cask of Amontillado" , this
author also wrote poems, such as one set in "a kingdom by the sea"
that suggests that angels caused the death of the title character, and
another that twice mentions "Night's Plutonian Shore" before invoking
the name of the speaker's lost love Lenore.  FTP, name this American
author of “Annabel Lee”  and “The Raven” ? Futurism A manifesto for
the architecture of this movement was written by Antonio Sant‟Elia, an
important architect of this style. Artists such as Mikhail Larionov of
Rayonism were influenced by this style, and the poet Vladimir
Mayakovsky was a prominent Russian member of this movement. The
Manifesto of this  movement claimed that “a speeding bullet is more
beautiful than the Mona Lisa,” and was written by Filippo Marinetti.
Works like The City Rises and Unique Forms of Continuity in Space are
paragons of this style. Artists like Gino Severini, Giacomo Balla, and
Umberto Boccioni were artists in, FTP, what early 20th century Italian
art style that worshipped speed and violence? “The Charge of the Light
Brigade” This poem describes how “All the world wonder‟d” at the
bravery and horrible consequences of the action described, after which
“They that had fought so well / Came thro‟ the Jaws of Death / Back
from the mouth of hell”. Though the titular group knew that “Some one
had blunder‟d”, they are described as doing their duty
unquestioningly, for “Theirs not to reason why / Theirs but to do and
die”. FTP, “Into the valley of death / Rode the six hundred” in what
poem commemorating the title group‟s defeat at the Battle of Balaclava
by Alfred Lord Tennyson? Dr. Dre Collaborators on this artist‟s
upcoming final album include Jay-Z, Lil‟ Wayne, Nas, and Eminem. That
album will be co-produced by Scott Storch and, in preparation for its
release, Drinks Americas has prepared a special line for this artist
labeled “Aftermath Cognac.” That album, Detox, has been in production
for over 7 years, since this artist‟s last solo album was released in
2000, but oddly titled “2001”  More famous for a collaboration with
Tupac on “California Love” and for multiple collaborations with Snoop
Dogg, most famously on “Nothing but a G Thang”, FTP name this Los
Angelos rapper and producer of “The Chronic,” a former member of
N.W.A. Sense and Sensibility One minor character in this novel is a
kindly distant relative of the protagonists‟ family who offers the
protagonists a cottage to live in when they are forced out of their
manor home by their stepbrother and his wife. In addition to Sir John
Middleton, another character is his mother-in-law, an insipid woman
who fancies herself the protagonists‟ matchmaker named Mrs. Jennings.
Many men, including John  Willoughby, Edward Ferrars, and Colonel
Brandon, pursue the protagonists‟ hands in marriage, but only Ferrars
and Brandon succeed. For ten points, Elinor and Marianne Dashwood
embody the title concepts, respectively, in what classic Jane Austen
romance? pulsars There are currently three classes of these objects
recognized by astronomers, one in which the decay of an extremely
strong magnetic field generates electromagnetic energy.. The first of
these were observed by Jocelyn Bell, and magnataurs are another
notable class of these objects. For some of these objects, the
regularity of their emission of radiation is as precise as an atomic
clock. The millisecond variety of these objects has allowed scientists
to test general relativity in an intense magnetic field. After their
formation during supernovae, they burn themselves out in about 50
million years, ceasing to spin before becoming neutron stars. FTP,
name this class of rapidly rotating neutron stars which emit
electromagnetic radiation at regular intervals. Inflation  1 A
positive effect of this is known as the Tobin effect, and states that
a moderate level this can increase investment. One negative effect of
this is represented by shoe leather costs. A Cost-push type of this
can result in a wage spiral. A relation between this and another
quantity was derived from Okun‟s law, which gives the relation between
unemployment and GDP. According to the quantity theory of money, this
quantity will increase with the difference between the money supply
and real output. The consumer Price index generally monitors this
quanity. An inverse relationship between employment and this is
predicted by the Philip‟s Curve. FTP, identify this quantity which
everyone seems to be worried about all the time, the decrease in the
purchasing power of money and the raising of prices. Bertrand Russell
Richard Dawkins referred to this man‟s namesake teapot in order to
show that one did not have to prove that God did not exist. He was a
noted pacifist, protesting everything from World War I to the Vietnam
War, and also spoke out against nuclear proliferation and Soviet
totalitarianism. He is considered a founder of analytic philosophy,
though his attempt to resolve all problems of mathematics was
destroyed by Gödel, and his assertions that philosophy could create
new knowledge was refuted by his greatest student Ludwig Wittgenstein.
This man‟s namesake paradox concerns the set of all sets that are not
members of themselves and his most famous popular works include “What
I Believe”, Problems of Philosophy, and Why I am Not a Christian. For
ten points, name this British philosopher who wrote Principia
Mathematica together with Alfred North Whitehead. Edward the Black
Prince This man became the first Prince of Wales never to become king
when he died one year before his father. Many of this man‟s campaigns
were chronicled by Froissart, while his Najera campaign saved his ally
Pedro the Cruel of Spain from a coup. Although this man wasn‟t much
concerned with Spanish  matters, his brother, John of Gaunt, was.
Capturing John the Good at the battle of Poitiers, this man also won
victories at Crecy and Calais at the outset of the Hundred Years‟ War.
The father of Richard II, this man never became king because he died
one year before his father, Edward III. FTP, identify this English
prince, known for the nickname that his colorful armor he wore into
battle gave him. Cry, the Beloved Country At the end of this novel, a
man named Napolean is hired to teach new agricultural techniques, and
another character brings milk to the children of Ndotsheni. (EN-do-
SHEE-nee). That character is the father of a man who, inspired by
Abraham Lincoln, works to bridge the gap between blacks and whites.
During his quest to find his son, the protagonist is aided by Msimangu
(Si-MAN-goo) and encounters his brother John, who has become involved
in local politics. That son originally left for the city to find his
aunt, but ends up seeking a life of crime culminating in the murder of
Arthur Jarvis. FTP, this is what novel sees Stephen Kumalo travel to
Johannesburg in search of his son by Alan Paton? El Niño–Southern
Oscillation This event, which is indirectly caused by the Madden-
Julian Oscillation, typically occurs every three to seven years and
has far-reaching effects, even occasionally in Asia and North America.
Episodes of this cyclic event are indicated by increases of more than
half a degree centigrade in sea surface temperature and series of
Kelvin waves. It typically begins with unusually warm ocean conditions
along the west coast of South America and faltering of the trade
winds. This event has devastating impacts on fishing, agriculture, and
local weather in tropical areas and can result in climatic anomalies
elsewhere. FTP, name this event which alternates with its cold phase,
La Niña. Marduk This deity is the father of Nabu, god of wisdom, and
although he is similar to the Sumerian god Shamash, he is actually a
son of the water god Ea. The god of pestilence Erra once terrorized
the earth after convincing this god to leave it unprotected. The Enuma
Elish lists fifty names of this storm god, and although he was the
basis for the protagonist of the apocryphal book Bel and the Dragon,
his own symbol was a dragon named Mushhushu. The most famous feat of
this god is his capture of the dragon Tiamat in his net and his
destruction of her using the winds. For ten points, name this god who
won back the Tablets of Destiny from Tiamat, and became the head of
the Babylonian pantheon. galvanic or voltaic cell The first step
towards their discovery was the finding that two different metals
touched to different parts of a frog nerve make the frog‟s muscles
contract. Because their reduction potentials cannot be determined on
an absolute scale, they are calculated by using the species in
question in one of these along with a hydrogen half-cell, which is
taken as the zero baseline of the reduction potential scale. Their
function is characterized by the Nernst equation, which takes into
account the concentration of the reacting species, and they generate
an electrical potential by separating a favorable reduction from a
favorable oxidation in a process underlying the function of batteries.
FTP, name this setup consisting of two metal electrodes each dipped in
a solution of a salt of the metal, with each half-cell connected by a
salt bridge to maintain electrical neutrality. Turing machine Emil
Post modified one of these constructs to use a symbol space and a two-
way infinite sequence of boxes, while another modification of these
constructs use an oracle to tell it when to go after stopping at state
o. One that reads a blank symbol and halts after a time is known as
the busy beaver, and one of these constructs exists for every
terminating algorithm according to the thesis of their namesake and
Church.  Consisting of a table, a read head, and a tape, FTP, name
these simple constructs, named for the guy who decoded the German
Enigma cypher and killed himself with a poisoned apple. Louis XVI The
son of Marie Josephe of Saxony and the Dauphin Louis Ferdinand, this
political figure‟s marriage to a certain Austrian Hapsburg princess
was overwhelmingly opposed by his native country, due to the fact that
Austria had dragged his nation into a costly defeat at the hands of
Great Britain during the Seven Years War. Upon ascending to the
throne, such economic advisers as Jacques Necker and Turgot dragged
his nation into further disarray, a situation exacerbated by the
perpetuation of the antiquated socio-economic structure of the
“Estates of the Realm.” For ten points, name this indecisive husband
of Marie Antoinette of Austria and the last king of France before the
outbreak of the French Revolution. Edith Wharton One novel by this
author tells of a Midwestern family that moves from Apex, and whose
daughter, Undine Spragg, attempts to enter New York high society, The
Custom of the Country. And social climbing in New York society forms
the plot of another more famous novel by this author about Lily Bart.
Another novel by this author tells the story of the “smash-up” that
destroyed the life of the titular farmer‟s love for his sickly wife
Zeena‟s cousin Mattie. The House of Mirth  and Ethan Frome are novels
by, FTP, what American author who wrote about Newland Archer‟s love
for the Countess Olenska in Age of Innocence? Symphonie fantastique  3
All four drummers are instructed to use sponge-headed drumsticks at
the end of this piece's third movement, a passage for four solo
timpani that depicts distant thunder. In the fifth and final movement,
a prominent theme returns as a shrill solo for E-flat clarinet. That
theme is derived from the composer's earlier cantata Herminie. The
third movement uses an oboe and an English horn to depict a duet
between two shepherds, and the last movement quotes the Dies irae
melody. Featuring movements such as "A Ball,"  "Reveries – Passions,"
and "Dream of a Witches' Sabbath," all five movements use a tune
depicting the actress Harriet Smithson. Featuring the idée fixe, for
10 points,  identify this programmatic symphony by Hector Berlioz.
Vitamin C or l-ascorbic acid Simians and passerine birds can no long
synthesize this compound, which can be made from in glucose in a four-
step process featuring the l-gulonolactone oxidase enzyme. This
vitamin is needed for the synthesis of norepinephrine, carnitine, and
the metabolism of tyrosine, and though it normally acts to reduce
oxidative stress, it can also function as a pro- oxidant. It is most
important as a cofactor for prolyl hydroxylase and lysyl hydroxylase,
enzymes which are needed for the proper formation of collagen‟s triple
helix structure. FTP, name this water soluble vitamin found in citrus
fruits whose deficiency is known as scurvy. Henry One ruler of this
name and a Duke of Saxony was a rival of the Hohenstaufen‟s and was
nicknamed  “the Lion.” A third ruler of this name fought the Barons‟
war led by Simon de Montfort, after which he was forced to sign the
Provisions of Oxford. A fourth ruler of this name was advised by the
Duc de Sully.  A few years before that man came to power, his country
had suffered through a namesake “war of the three  „rulers of this
name.‟” That man went on to issue the Edict of Nantes. A second ruler
of what name was, FTP, king of England and Married to Eleanor of
Aquitaine. Beer-Lambert-Bouguer Law This relation is only valid if the
interacting entities are homogeneously distributed in the medium and
do not scatter the incoming radiation, which must come in via parallel
and preferably monochromatic rays. It describes the adsorption of
light as it relates to the properties of the media in showing that the
transmissivity of light depends logarithmically on the product of the
adsorption coefficient of the substance and the path length of the
light. FTP, expressing what equation in terms of absorbance yields an
equation that shows that absorbance is proportional to concentration,
where concentration is the adsorption  coefficient divided by the
molar absorptivity? Normans The White Tower is exemplary of these
peoples’ architecture. Kind David I was instrumental in  introducing
the culture of these people into Scotland. A group of these peoples
were instrumental in  founding Kievan Rus, under the name of
Varangians. Roger II ruled Sicily as one of these people, after his
uncle Robert Guiscard had conquered it from the Saracens. But perhaps
the most famous conquest of these peoples was chronicled in the Bayeux
Tapestry. FTP, identify these people from a namesake region of
northern France, who conquered England under the leadership of William
the Conqueror. Ben Jonson In one play by this author, Morose marries
the titular “silent woman” only to discover that she is in fact a
nagging shrew and not even actually a woman. In another play.
Littlewit tries to outwit the Puritan Zeal-of-the-Land Busy to try and
steal his wife Dame Purecraft at the title celebration in Smithfield.
Besides those plays, Epicoene  and Bartholomew Fair, he wrote one in
which the titular Venetian gentleman fakes being on his deathbed to
dupe characters such as Corbaccio and Corvino into competing to become
his heir, and one in which Jeremy pretends to be Captain Face, who can
turn base metal into gold. FTP, who is English Renaissance playwright
of Volpone  and The Alchemist? Marshall Plan The beginnings of this
act were introduced by its namesake formulator during a speech at
Harvard  University, and the first nations benefitted by this program
were Greece and Turkey. Although US foreign officials tried to extend
the benefits from this program to the Soviet Bloc, Joseph Stalin
rejected the offer, dismissing the supposed generosity of the US
government as a surreptitious method of destabilizing his  regime. For
ten points, name this “plan” to facilitate the economic recovery of
post-World War II Europe, the brainchild of Harry Truman’s Secretary
of State. Eugene Onegin Opening with a seemingly harmless meeting
between the title figure and his naïve, overly emotional  neighbor,
this novel describes how the sister of the neighbor’s fiancée quickly
falls in love with the title character, who brusquely rejects her
advances. The protagonist then thoughtlessly flirts with his
neighbor’s fiancée, Olga Larina, which prompts a challenge to a duel
by the neighbor, Alexander Lensky. For ten  points, the titular
aristocratic dandy dallies with Tatyanaand later murders Lensky in
which influential novel of the Russian Romantic movement written by
Alexander Pushkin? Nile River The modern day name of this river comes
from Greek, but in the countries where it actually flows  through, it
has been called “great river” or simply “the river”. From 8000 BC to
1000 BC, this river had a third tributary, named Yellow, that followed
through eastern Chad. The two sources for this river are  Rwanda and
Ethiopia, and these two tributaries meet at Khartoum. Following
construction of the Aswan  High Dam in 1970, this river has ceased to
be used for irrigation, but it is still an important source of
transportation. FTP, name this longest river in the world, which flows
by the Pyramids and the Sphnix. Last Suppers One painting of this
subject is located in the refectory of Sant’Apollonia and was painted
by Andrea del Castagno. That painting depicts one of the subjects in
an isolated position from the others. Another  painting of this event
does not depict the figures occupying the middle of the canvas, as is
usual. That work is also noted for its general mannerist style and the
supernatural figure that surrounds the central figure with light on
the lefthand side. Veronese’s Feast in the House of Levi was actually
a depiction of this event, but he was force to change the title. The
most famous painting of this subject features a  vanishing point in
the exact center of the painting through three windows behind the
thirteen figures. FTP, identify the shared name of these paintings by
Castagno, Tintoretto, and Leonardo da Vinci, which depict the last
meal of Christ before his Crucifixion. John Calvin Although he pleaded
for toleration from the Catholic Church, this man was not hesitant to
use violence, executing the heretic Michael Servetus for his views.
Even more than Luther, he shaped the beliefs of the Puritans, which
led Weber to hold him responsible for the development of Capitalism.
After his death, this man’s Huguenot community in Geneva was led by
Zwingli. This leader of the Protestant Reformation in  France was most
famous for his Institutes of the Christian Religion. For ten points,
name this second most important Protestant theologian who believed in
predestination. House of Atreus (prompt on Atreus; accept Atreides
before mention) This dynasty famously if briefly ruled the city
founded according to legend by Perseus, which city  would later give
its name to the period of post-Minoan, pre-Dark Age Ancient Greek
history. Its less  notable members included Hippodamia and Thyestes,
respectively mother and brother of this dynasty's  namesake.
Hippodamia's name alludes to the second, non-cannibalized death of the
peninsula-naming  father of this dynasty's namesake. In Frank
Herbert's Dune, the House, often opposed to House Harkonnen, that is
led by Leto and Paul is said to be descended from this cursed dynasty.
That fictional house is Atreides. FTP, name this house, whose members
included Tantalus, Pelops, Menelaus, Agamemnon, and  its namesake.
aldosterone This hormone's release is limited by atrial natriuretic
peptide, while its action can be opposed by compounds like
spironolactone and amphenone. Its overproduction is known as Conn's
syndrome, while its  underproduction is associated with Addison's
disease. It acts on the kidneys as part of the renin-angiotensin
system, while its release from the zona glomerulosa to act on the
collecting ducts and distal tubule results in higher blood pressure
and increased excretion of potassium ions. FTP, name the
mineralocorticoid  produced by the adrenal glands to promote increased
sodium ion and water reabsorption. Hubble’s Law This relation, which
was formulated by analyzing the spectra of galaxies, is currently
believed to be caused by dark energy and is a variation of Doppler
shift in the context of special relativity. Fainter, older galaxies
were noted to have their spectrum shifted further to lower
wavelengths, a result which supported the predictions of the Friedmann
equations and indicated that other galaxies were moving away from our
galaxy. A more interesting observation showed that not only were
galaxies in all regions of the sky moving away from the Milky Way, but
they were also moving away from each other. FTP, what is this law
which  explains the expansion of the universe which gets its name from
its famous astronomer formulator and a  namesake constant and space
telescope? Charles Ives Late in life, this composer revised his second
symphony so that its final chord contained 11 of the 12  notes of the
chromatic scale. The spontaneous singing of the hymn "In the Sweet Bye
and Bye" in response to the sinking of the Lusitania inspired his From
Hanover Square North. His fourth symphony features a  "Comedy"
movement based on Hawthorne's "The Celestial Railroad." The second
movement of another piece, based on the composer's earlier Country
Band March, is "Putnam's Camp," and that piece's first movement
depicts Saint-Gaudens' monument to Colonel Robert Shaw. In another
piece a string quartet and  woodwind quartet accompany the inquisitive
solo trumpet. For 10 points, identify this composer of Three Places in
New England and The Unanswered Question. Unification of Germany A lead
up to this event was the so-called humiliation of Olmutz. Karl Blind
was a leading figure in the push for this to occur. World War I was
officially ended in the same location in which this event formally
occurred. An earlier attempt to accomplish this by the Frankfurt
parliament would have been a  Kleindeutsch solution, was thwarted by
Frederick William IV. The final phase of this event began when the Ems
dispatch was doctored by a certain chancellor and then sent to
Napoleon III. Earlier, that same chancellor had provoked the Seven
Weeks war with Austria over the territories of Schleswig and Holstein.
Using techniques like Realpolitik and the “Blood and Iron” speech,
Otto Von Bismark managed to, FTP,  accomplish what event by 1871? E.O.
Wilson The Wall Street Journal recently reported on this man’s new
novel, a book it compared to the Iliad. As a child, he became blind in
one eye following a fishing accident; this reportedly led him to focus
his field observations on insects instead of birds or mammals because
of his ability to observe them. He won a  Pulitzer in 1979 for the
book On Human Nature and a second Pulitzer in 1991 for The Ants, but
he is still best known for a controversial book, Sociobiology, which
compared human societies to those of other animals. FTP, name this
evolutionary biologist, a proponent of Biophilia. One Flew Over the
Cuckoo’s Nest The narrator of this novel believes the place where he
lives runs a fog machine and calls society’s means of keeping people
in line “The Combine”. And later reveals he is not really deaf by
voting to watch the World Series in a group meeting. One character in
this novel has a neurotic obsession with cleanliness, George Sorenson.
And other characters include the articulate, closeted homosexual,
Harding, and the  stuttering, mother-dominated Billy Bibbit. Chief
Bromden narrates the tale of patients of the psychiatric ward in, FTP,
what novel in which con man Randle McMurphy fights the tyrannical rule
of Nurse Ratched  by Ken Kesey? William Thackeray A pair of historical
novels by this author follows first the titular colonel of the English
army in the time of Queen Anne and later his two grandsons George and
Henry Warrington, who take opposite sides in the  American Revolution,
The History of Henry Esmond  and The Virginians. And he wrote about a
picaresque about an Irishman named Redmond Barry, who tries to wile
his way into the English Aristocracy in The Luck of Barry Lyndon. But
his most popular work is a “Novel Without A Hero”, whose protagonist
include the virtuous Amanda Sedley and the manipulative Becky Sharp.
FTP, this is what English novelist of  Vanity Fair? Their Eyes Were
Watching God A symbol in this novel is that of a blossoming pear tree,
which represents the beauty and harmony of nature. The frame narrative
of the novel sees the protagonist tell her tale to Phoeby Watson after
returning from Eatonville. One character in this novel became the
mayor and was married to the protagonist before his dictatorial nature
and eventual death causes her to fall in love with a man she plays
checkers with, whose real name is Vergible Woods. However, the latter
character ends up succumbing to a bite from a  rabid dog he defended
her from during a hurricane in the Everglades. FTP, Logan Killicks,
Jody Starks, and Tea Cake are the three husbands of Janie Mae Crawford
in what novel by Zora Neale Hurston? Claude Debussy One piano piece by
this composer quotes from the Prelude to Wagner's Tristan and Isolde,
adding laughing grace-note figures. A wordless women's chorus appears
in the "Sirens" movement of another piece. In addition to
"Golliwogg's Cakewalk" and Nocturnes for orchestra, he wrote a
collection of piano pieces that includes "The Sunken Cathedral" and
one that depicts fireworks and quotes the Marseillaise; those are his
preludes for piano. The first movement of a piece subtitled "three
symphonic sketches orchestra" depicts from dawn to noon in the title
location, and another was inspired by a poem by Mallarmé. For 10
points, identify this composer of La mer and Prelude to the Afternoon
of a Faun, an impressionist. Drosophila or fruit fly Some members of
this genus, whose name derives from the Greek for “dew loving,”
include bifurca, immigrans, and simulans. Bifurca is well known for
having the longest sperm cells of any organism, while the genes
aubergine, cheap date, I’m not dead yet, and Antennapedia are
affiliated with the more common melanogaster  variety. Thomas Hunt
Morgan used this model organism to study epistasis and sex-linked
inheritance. FTP, name this genus that is commonly used for genetics
research because of its high reproduction rate and easy care. social
contract David Hume criticized this idea by demonstrating that
governments always derive authority from tradition, and Edmund Burke
decried this theory by claiming that individual rights must arise
organically from a particular set of legal and cultural norms. An
ancient precursor to this idea is formulated in the Crito by Socrates,
who claims that he cannot flee Athenian prison because of his consent
to Athenian law, but the earliest modern version of this idea is found
in Thomas Hobbes’ Leviathan, which identifies it as a method of
overcoming the “war of all against all” in the state of nature.
Immanuel Kant proposed one of these between nations rather than
individuals in his On Perpetual Peace, while John Rawls claims that
one of these requires the existence of a “veil of ignorance”. For ten
points, name this concept in political theory best formulated in a
namesake tract by Jean-Jacques Rousseau. A Portrait of the Artist as a
Young Man The protagonist of this novel enrolls at University College,
and records a discussion he had with Cranly in his journal which ends
with the invocation "Old father, Old Articificer, Stand me now and
ever in good stead". After listening to a sermon by Father Arnall, the
protagonist recalls his time spent at Clongowes parochial school and
his past sexual transgressions. The novel begins with the
protagonist's father recounting a story about "a very good time" and a
"a moocow coming down the road" that "met a nicens little boy named
Baby Tuckoo" Originally titled Stephen Hero, FTP, name this novel that
chronicles Stephen Dedalus's rejection of his religion and embrace and
development of aesthetic theory by James Joyce. Gideon He is mentioned
in Paul’s epistle to the Hebrews as a man of faith, and Christians
believe his fleece to represent the Annunciation to Mary. That fleece
was alternately soaked with dew and left dry as God’s sign to this
man, who destroyed an idol to Baal and marched on the enemies of the
Israelites, who were camped in the Valley of Jezreel.  God told this
man that the force he gathered against the Midianites was too large,
and convinced him to decrease their number until only 300 remained.
This son of Joash then proceeded to rout the Midianites by instructing
his men to blow trumpets and carry torches. For ten points, name this
judge of Israel who followed Deborah. Death of a Salesman Important
props in this play include some rubber hose which one character found
behind a fuse box, and that character’s stockings, which always need
mending, contrasting with the new stockings the protagonist buys for
his mistress. Several characters in this play insist on the importance
of being “well liked”, which they claim will be the failing of
Charley’s son Bernard. The title character regrets not going to Alaska
with Uncle Ben, and after being fired by Howard attempts to rely on
his sons Happy and Biff for support, in FTP, what play by Arthur
Miller about the imploding American Dream of Willy Loman? Gustave
Flaubert One short story by this author depicts the tale of the
beheading of John- the-Baptist from the point-of-view of the wife of
Herod, while another tells of the life of the servant Félicité who
serves Madame Aubain and loves her parrot, LouLou. Besides writing
“Herodias”  and “A Simple Heart” which are collected in his Three
Tales,  this author also wrote about the titular daughter of Hamilcar
Barca and Carthaginian priestess and about Fréderic Moreau’s on-again
off-again love for Mme. Arnoux, in Salammbo and Sentimental Education.
FTP, Emma has affairs with Rodolphe and Léon after she becomes
dissatisfied with her husband, the provincial doctor, Charles, in what
French author’s Madame Bovary? Nathan Bedford Forrest Although never
formally trained in military techniques, this man nevertheless became
a standout among the Confederate army brain trust, using his
intimidating physical presence and considerable leadership skills to
motivate his troops to victories in such conflicts as the Battle of
Brice’s Crossing. However, his darker side manifested itself in the
Fort Pillow Massacre, where this man allegedly shot down multitudes of
unarmed African American Union soldiers in cold blood. His most
politically significant action would take place after the war, when he
served as the first head of a fraternal organization created to
“protect the rights” of white Americans through violence and
intimidation. For ten points, name this first Grand Wizard of the Ku
Klux Klan. Henderson-Hasselbalch equation This equation is most often
used to approximate a value found experimentally using a glass-
electrode voltmeter that measures activity. The inspiration behind
this equation came in 1908 when its first namesake wrote an equation
for the behavior in aqueous solution of carbon dioxide. When carbon
dioxide dissolves in water, it produces a compound H2CO3 which is of
the class of compounds described by this equation. Rearranging that
equation after taking the opposite of the base-10 logarithm of both
sides produces this formula. Models for the class of compounds
described by this equation include ones by Arrhenius, Lewis, and
Brønsted and Lowry. FTP, name this doubly- eponymous logarithmic
equation that adds the pKa to the relative concentrations of conjugate
base and acid of a buffer solution to yield the pH. Hoovervilles The
popular name for these communities was formulated by Charles
Michelson, the publicity chief of the Democratic National Committee,
and the largest of them was set up in Central Park, where residents
angrily demonstrated against the perceived lack of governmental action
taken against unemployment and the rampant corruption of city
officials. For ten points, name these shantytowns inhabited by
desperate unemployed Americans during the early 1930’s, ironically
named for the president who failed to take decisive action in response
to the Great Depression. magnetic field At any given point, it
consists of both a magnitude and a direction and it can be created via
the dynamo mechanism and excluded from certain entities in the
Meissner effect. They can be detected by the force they exert on
moving electric charges, as described by the Lorentz force law, and
concentrated using quadrupole focusing or solenoids. Its generation by
an electric current is described by the Biot-Savart law, and its
direction around a wire can be found using the right hand rule. FTP,
name these lines of force generated by objects with north and south
poles. Edouard Manet This man painted a portrait of his sister-in-law,
Berthe Morisot, who was a famous painter in her own right. One of his
most famous paintings is based on the earlier Venus of Urbino by
Titian, and is titled Olympia. His Music in the Tullieries depicts
some of his other impressionist friends dancing while his most famous
work depicts a woman laying naked on the grass with two fully clothed
men attending to her. FTP, identify this French painter, the painter
of Luncheon on the Grass. Often called the founder of impressionism,
not to be confused with a similar sounding painter of Impression:
sunrise. plasmid Col and R factors are two types of these, and they
can be cut at specific sites using restriction enzymes to allow for
the insertion of foreign genetic elements. Episomes are a variety
connected to the cell membrane, and all self- replicate autonomously
and can impart specific properties to the organism. They have found
uses as vectors in gene cloning and recombinant DNA technologies, but
are better known for their potential in imparting bacteria with
antibiotic resistance. Exchangeable through sex pili-mediated
conjugation, FTP, name these circular DNA constructs which can
replicate independently of the bacterial chromosome. Sapir- Whorf
Hypothesis In his book Women, Fire, and Dangerous things, George
Lakoff four ways in which researchers disagree about the import of
this concept. In his book the Language Instinct, Steven Pinker argues
against this construct, while the view of universalist grammar
pioneered by Chomsky found itself arguing against this idea. One of
the two namesakes of this theory classified native American languages
into 6 major divisions. This idea was originally meant to demonstrate
that the Hopi do not experience time in the same way as English
speakers. FTP, identify this hypothesis dealing with linguistic
perception, which states that language invariably influences how we
think. William Wordsworth In one work by this man, the narrator says
“We poets in our youth begin in gladness; / But thereof come in the
end despondency and madness.” In another work by this man, he wonders:
“Whither is fled the visionary gleam? /  Where is it now, the glory
and the dream?” Neither Resolution and Independence nor the Ode:
Intimations of Immortality  were included in this man’s 1798
collection, Lyrical Ballads, which he published with his friend Samuel
Taylor Coleridge. FTP, name this English Romantic, who wrote about
daffodils in “I wandered lonely as a cloud”, the author of Tintern
Abbey. Genghis Khan The secret history of his people says that this
man was born with a blood clot grasped in his fist, a sign that he
would be a great leader. He sought out Toghoril, the leader of the
Keraits, as a teenager, and later united the Keraits with Merkits,
Uyghurs, and others to form his confederation. FTP, name this leader
who counts one half of one percent of Earth’s population among his
descendants. In 1206 he unified the Mongols. stomach This organ’s
fundic and cardiac regions contain foveolar cells which secrete mucus,
while intrinsic factor, which is necessary for vitamin B12 absorption,
is released by its parietal cells. Blood supplied through the left and
right gastro-omental arteries allows its enteroendocrine cells to
produce somatostatin, cholecystokinin, and gastrin and its chief cells
to secrete rennin and pepsinogen. Its rugae folds increase surface
area, thus allowing for improved digestion in the region between its
pyloric and esophageal sphincters. FTP, name this hydrochloric acid-
producing organ which digests food into chime. www. Chatroulette.com
This website was founded by Andrew Ternovski, and celebrities said to
visit it include Ashton Kutcher, Paris Hilton, and the Jonas Brothers.
Ben Folds streamed part of a concert in Charlotte, NC over this
website, and a user known only as Merton performs piano improvisations
for his partners on this site.  Commentators have noted its similarity
to sites like Omegle.com while both praising and criticizing the
closeness between partners it offers. FTP, name this website that
randomly pairs users with others in a videochat, named after a game in
which players put a single round in a revolver, hold the gun next to
their head, and pull the trigger. Mannerism Rosso Fiorentino brought
this movement to Fontainebleu, France, where he helped to found a
French equivalent of this artistic style. The Salt Cellar of Francis I
is a sculptural example of this style, as is Perseus with the Head of
Medusa by Benvenuto Cellini. Another painting representing this style
depicts the Burial of the Count of Orgaz, while a painting by
Bronzino, Venus, Cupid, Folly, and Time is a key painting in this
artistic style. Some of Michaelangelo’s late works can be said to be
in this style. This style was perhaps most concentrated in Venice,
where the painters of works like Sacred and Profane love and the
Finding of the Body of St. Mark worked. FTP, identify this style
perhaps best exemplified by Painters like Titian, Tintoretto, and
Parmigianino, which followed the Renaissance and features exaggerated
human forms. chromium It was first discovered in 1797 by a French
pharmacist who produced the oxide of this element by mixing crocoites
with hydrochloric acid, and he was later able to retrieve the metallic
element by heating its oxide. Its +3 oxidation state is the most
common, and can be obtained by dissolving its elemental form in
hydrochloric acid or sulfuric acid, though it also comes in +4, +5,
and +6 varieties. Trace amounts of this element replace aluminum in
corundum to form rubies, and it is mixed with iron to form stainless
steel alloys. FTP, what is this transition metal with atomic number 24
which is known for the bright colors of its compounds and complexes?
Moby-Dick A Sub-Sub Librarian and a Late Consumptive Usher supply an
Etymology and a series of Extracts which preface this work. One
character in it declares that a ship was his “Yale College” and his
“Harvard.”  Another character in this work discovers he can no longer
enjoy a pipe and casts it overboard. While other characters in this
novel include the harpooners Daggoo, Tashtego, and the cannibal,
Queequeg, and the first mate, Starbuck. FTP, name this novel, which
begins “Call Me Ishmael,” and was written by Herman  Melville. Edward
Elgar  1 He wrote a part-song in which men and women sing in the keys
of G and A-flat, respectively. That piece sets the "choric song" from
Tennyson's "The Lotos-Eaters" and is called "There is Sweet Music."
"The Swimmer" and "Where Corals Lie" appear in an orchestral song
cycle of his, and the Angel of the Agony appears in an oratorio with
text by Cardinal Newman. In addition to Sea Pictures and The Dream of
Gerontius, he wrote a piece famously recorded by Jacqueline du Pré,
his cello concerto in E minor. Another piece contains sections called
"C.A.E." and "Ysobel," as well as one inspired by Beethoven's
Pathetique Sonata, "Nimrod." For 10 points, identify this composer who
depicted his friends in his Enigma Variations and wrote Pomp and
Circumstance. Federalist Papers (accept The Federalist) One notable
volume in this collection of treatises offers advice on how best to
prevent “tyranny of the majority,” thereby ensuring that “factions”
cannot harm the best interests of society or force their views on
dissenting citizens. Written under the pseudonym of Publius, in homage
to the Roman consul Publius Valerius Publicola, other articles argue
for the creation of a strong chief executive at the helm of government
as well as for the exclusion of a Bill of Rights from any potential
framework of government.  For ten points, name this collection of
documents written by John Jay, James Madison, and Alexander Hamilton
to persuade residents of New York to ratify the United States
Constitution. Tartuffe One character in this play, ignores his
servant’s reports of his wife’s bad fever and headache to inquire
about the health of another guest of his house, only to respond “poor
fellow” no matter how positive the news. Later, that character forbids
his daughter Marianne from marrying Valère and disinherits his son
Damis for accusations against the title character, and continues to
refuse to believe the title character’s treachery until he witnesses
him attempt to seduce his wife, Elmire. FTP, Orgon’s family is plagued
by the titular religious hypocrite in what play by Molière? The Cold
War One part of this conflict was Able Archer 83, which was believed
to conceal a first strike. Joseph Mobutu and Patrice Lumumba became
combatants in this conflict, and when Mobutu won he was granted
parachuting lessons at Fort Bragg. Quemoy, Matsu, Khe Sanh, Inchon,
Prague, and Berlin became hotspots in this conflict. FTP, name this
conflict, which cooled during détente and ended with the dissolution
of the Soviet Union. inductance This property can be used to create
circuits that filter out a particular frequency from a complex signal.
Its namesake reactance is given by two pi times the signal frequency
times this, and it is positive because the phase of the voltage leads
the phase of the current. For a single loop of wire, this is given by
phi over I, where phi is the magnetic flux through the loop and i is
the current. FTP, name this property, commonly measured in henries,
whereby a changing current induces an electromotive force that opposes
the change in the current. Friedrich {Nietzsche} He decried a
scientific approach to history in his On the Uses and Disadvantages of
History for Life, an essay included in his early volume, Untimely
Meditations. He was strongly influenced by the theories of Heraclitus,
but blamed Socrates for the decline of Athenian drama in The Birth of
Tragedy. His theory of eternal recurrence posited that the universe
went through cycles of existence, a view praised in The Gay Science
and Ecce Homo. More famous were his claim that Christianity warped
classical definitions of good and bad and his call for a
“transvaluation of all values”, which were included in On the
Genealogy of Morality. This 19th century German thinker’s Beyond Good
and Evil elaborates on his most famous ideas of the Will to Power and
the Übermensch. For ten points, name this philosopher who wrote that
“God is dead” in Thus Spoke Zarathustra. Robert Francis Kennedy
(accept RFK)  2 A Harvard University varsity football player, this
politician later earned some preliminary geopolitical experience when
he traveled to Palestine firsthand in order to analyze tensions
between Israeli settlers in the region and Palestinian Arabs. Upon
returning to the US, and after talking tough with such influential
figures as Jimmy Hoffa and Joseph McCarthy, he became one of the then-
president’s closest advisers and a leader in the fight against
organized crime and the mafia. Appointed Attorney General during the
president’s tenure and winning a Massachusetts Senate race after the
president died, for ten points, name this icon of modern American
liberalism, a Democratic candidate for the 1968 presidential election,
the target of assassin Sirhan Sirhan, and the younger brother of John
Fitzgerald. Muhummad This man grew up as an orphan in the house of his
uncle and married Khadija, a widow who owned a caravan. Eight
additional wives survived him, including his favorite wife A’isha.
After this man’s death, A’isha contested the claim of one of his sons,
Ali, to become caliph. FTP, name this man, who is said to have
received revelations from the angel Gabriel, and who in 622 traveled
to Medina from Mecca. seafloor spreading The Morley-Vine-Matthews
hypothesis predicted that this phenomenon would result in symmetric
patterns in rocks at certain locations, providing the first strong
support for this notion. These patterns record the reversals of the
earth's magnetic field. First proposed by Harry Hess, it describes a
process that can occur at a triple junction or a divergent boundary.
FTP, identify this now widely- accepted theory that helps explain
continental drift, a process in which new oceanic crust is formed at
mid-ocean ridges. Oscar Wilde Short stories by this author include one
in which a nightingale impales itself on a rose to make it red and one
in which the titular statue asks a swallow to dismantle him and spread
his pieces those in need, both collected in The Happy Prince and Other
Tales.  This author’s time in prison produced two notable works: a
letter to his lover Lord Alfred Douglas, titled De Profundis, and a
poem containing the immortal line “each man kills the thing he loves”,
“The Ballad of Reading Gaol” . His most popular play sees Jack
Worthing and Algernon Moncrieff both claim to have the titular first
name in order to woo Gwendolyn and Cecily. FTP, this is what Irish
author of An Ideal Husband  and The Importance of Being Earnest?
Sharia (prompt on Islamic law) Many Sufis consider themselves to be
above this concept. It determines whether food is halal or hareem, and
requires ablution after impure acts. There are four main madh’habs, or
schools of thought concerning this concept, which is interpreted by
ulama and applied by qadi. An opinion made by ulama pertaining to this
concept is called a fatwa, and it is taught in certain madrasas along
with general Islamic knowledge. Although an important source of it is
ijtihad, or logical reasoning, the most important sources are hadith,
or records of the deeds of the prophet, and the text of the Quran. For
ten points, name this system of Islamic law which pertains to all
aspects of Muslim life. Truman Capote This author reported about an
The Everyman’s Opera troupe’s attempt to stage Gershwin’s Porgy and
Bess in the U.S.S.R. in his The Muses Are Heard and wrote about Joel
Harrison Knox, who is sent to live with his grotesque relatives at
Skully’s Landing, in Other Voices, Other Rooms. He was the basis for
Dill in a novel written by his longtime friend Harper Lee, To Kill a
Mockingbird. His two popular works are a true crime story about the
Clutter family murder in Kansas and a novella about society girl Holly
Golightly.  FTP, this is what American author of In Cold Blood and
Breakfast at Tiffany’s. New Jersey This state is estimated to have
been continually populated for nearly three thousand years, and the
first European settlers were the Dutch and the Swedes. Its present
Governor is Republican but both its Senators are Democrats, and one of
them is the only Senator to have returned to the Senate after
retirement. The main airport in this state is the second-largest hub
for Continental Airlines, and its largest city is home to the
Prudential Center. The fifth-smallest state in the US, Elizabeth and
Edison are amongst the bigger cities in this state. FTP, name this
north-eastern state, adjacent to New York City, that is home to Newark
Airport and the Nets. array  3 The Judy algorithm can be used to
define a very fast version of these data structures by combining them
with features of a hash, and a Vlist combines them with linked lists.
Indexing in these structures occurs in big omega of 1 time and have
zero wasted space, while resizable ones are referred to as dynamic.
Slicing is a method for removing a part of these data structures and
putting them into a smaller one, and these structures can be declared
by declaring a series of dimensions after the name of a variable.
Usually used with for loops and to implement tables, for 10 points,
identify these matrix-like data structures, a group of variables with
the same name but different indices. Slaughterhouse Five The
protagonist of this novel has a breakdown at his eighteenth wedding
anniversary because a barbershop quartet brings back painful
associations. Minor characters in this novel include Ronald Weary,
whose death will be avenged by Paul Lazzarro. The protagonist has an
amorous relationship with Montana Wildhack in a zoo on the planet of
the Tralfamadorians, and enjoys the novels of Kilgore Trout. The
protagonist and his soldier-comrades are in the titular German camp
during the firebombing of Dresden.  Death is always accompanied by the
phrase “so it goes” in, FTP, what novel in which Billy Pilgrim becomes
“unstuck in time” by Kurt Vonnegut? MTV’s Jersey Shore One character
on this TV show reveals that she used to have an eating disorder
during the seventh episode. That character’s mother visits her the day
before a more famous incident at a club. That incident was not aired,
and in its place, MTV showed a 2-minute slot to promote awareness of
domestic violence. In that same episode, a character who stresses the
importance of proper hair maintenance, two-hours of gym-time a day,
and tanning salons takes “a grenade” for fellow house-mate Mike
Sorrentino. After arguing over the ownership of a round of shots at a
club, Snookie is punched in FTP, what TV show featuring guidos and
guidettes like Pauly D, J-woww, and The Situation, set at the beach of
a titular Northeastern state. alcohols Molecules with this functional
group include testosterone and dopamine, and one of these can suppress
the action of antidiuretic hormone. Grignard reagents react with
carbonyls to produce these, and they can be produced from alkenes
through hydroboration and oxymercuration. When attached to an alkyl
chain, these usually have a pKa of 16 to 19 and thus are slightly more
acidic than water. One of these, which is sometimes used for fuel, is
produced by Saccharomyces cervisiae from sugar. FTP, name this
functional group defined by an oxygen bonded to a hydrogen that is
found in chemicals such as ethanol. Roger Williams In his A Key into
the Language of America, this thinker showed that he was one of the
first Europeans to undertake a scholarly study of various Native
American tribal languages. Later he wrote his most important tract,
The Bloody Tenant.  Earlier in his life, he chafed at Archbishop
William Laud’s strict control of Anglican Church doctrine, escaping
with his wife Mary to Boston. Due to his prior religious training, he
was immediately invited to become a pastor, but refused the job and
was eventually exiled, for he believed that civic authorities should
exercise no power over one’s own religious convictions. For ten
points, name this notable advocate of religious tolerance and founder
of the colony of Rhode Island. Paradise Lost The narrator of this work
declares that he was inspired by a spirit who “Dove-like satst
brooding on the vast abyss / And mad’st it pregnant: and that it will
pursue “Things unattempted yet in prose or Rhyme”. In Book II of this
work, Moloch declares that he is in favor of open war, while Mammon
believes the wiser plan is to build a kingdom to rival that of God’s.
Eventually they agree to investigate the new race of beings known as
Man, and send a character who had earlier declared that it was “better
to reign in hell than serve in heaven”. FTP name this English epic by
John Milton. Compton effect Its inverse variety results in photons
gaining energy and the Sunyaev- Zel'dovich effect due to distortions
of the cosmic microwave background radiation. This effect is observed
when a high-energy photon collides with a target that contains
loosely-bound electrons on its outer shell. The x-rays scattered from
these electrons have a longer wavelength than that of the incident
photon, and this shift in wavelength increases with the scattering
angle. FTP, name this effect that lent further support to the idea of
wave- particle duality. Robert Schumann The first movement of one of
his pieces includes a middle section marked "Im Legendenton" and ends
with an allusion to the last song from Beethoven's An die ferne
Geliebte; that piece is his Fantasy in C.  Another collection of piano
pieces features three "Sphinxes" between the eighth and ninth
movements, each of which consists of just three or four notes relating
to the letters A-S-C-H. Those three motifs appear throughout the piece
in movements such as "Eusebius" and "Florestan." Another collection
opens with "Of Foreign Lands and Peoples" and contains "Träumerei," or
"Dreaming." For 10 points, identify this composer of Carnaval and
Scenes from Childhood, who also wrote the Rhenish Symphony. linear In
topology, for a transformation of this type, uniform continuity is
equivalent to continuity.  Inhomogenous ordinary differential
equations of this type can be solved with the method of variation of
parameters. Eigenvectors return a scalar multiple of themselves when a
transformation with this property is applied to them. Cramer’s rule is
used to solve systems of equations with this property, and this word
also describes vector spaces because they’re closed under addition and
scalar multiplication. FTP, name this property that is also used to
describe polynomial equations of the first order, which generate
lines. Eugene O’Neill One play by this author tells the story of an
escaped convict named Brutus who becomes ruler of a Carribean island,
while another tells of Eben’s adulterous affair with his young
stepmother, Abbie Putnam.  In addition to writing The Emperor Jones
and Desire Under the Elms, he also wrote a play in which Hickey
disrupts the pipe dreams of the denizens of Harry Hope’s Saloon, and
one in which the consumptive Edmund and opium-addicted Mary are
members of the declining Tyrone family. FTP, this is what  American
playwright of The Iceman Cometh and Long Day’s Journey Into Night?
Simon Bolivar This man benefited from a decision to enlist demobilized
English soldiers from the Napoleonic Wars and by a revolt against
Ferdinand VII. He was originally opposed to the abolition of slavery
but supported emancipation to grow his armies and draw supplies from
Haiti. After the war, he established Gran Columbia out of Ecuador,
Colombia, and Venezuela. FTP, name this leader who overthrew Spanish
rule in South America. Raoult's law This law will not be followed if
the intermolecular bonding between two components of a solution is
greater than the intermolecular bonding between the other combinations
of components. For instance, a solution of benzene and ethyl alcohol
will not obey this law because benzene and ethyl alcohol are
immiscible. If a solution does not show preferential intermolecular
bonding and thus obeys this law, it is considered an ideal solution.
Those that deviate from it have an activity coefficient not equal to
one. FTP, name this law which states that the vapor pressure of a
solution is dependent on the vapor pressure of the components and
their mole fraction. Thomas Mann  2 One novel by this author was
published in four parts over sixteen years and is an epic based on the
Genesis story, which draws similarities between Judaism and Atenism,
the religious philosophy of the Egyptian Pharaoh Akhenaton. Besides
Joseph and his Brothers, other notable works chronicle the rise and
fall of a wealthy Lubeck mercantile family, Count Aeschenbach’s
unhealthy obsession with the adolescent Tadzio, and Hans Castorp’s
extended stay in a Swiss Alps moratorium. For ten points, name this
German Nobel Laureate author of Buddenbrooks, Death in Venice, and The
Magic Mountain. Vishnu He is mentioned in the Rig Veda as drinking
Soma and helping Indra, though he would later take on a central role
in Vaishnavism. His arms hold a conch, a chakram, a mace, and a lotus,
and in one incarnation, he teaches Arjuna the practice of dharma
before a battle. In another incarnation, he rescues his wife Sita from
the demon-king Ravana before claiming the throne of Ayodhya. His mount
is the eagle Garuda, though he is usually shown reclining on the
serpent Shesha Naga together with his consort Lakshmi. For ten points,
name this preserver god in Hinduism, whose avatars include Rama and
Krishna, and who forms the Trimurti with Brahma and Shiva. Ming
Dynasty Literature written during this dynasty included the play the
Peony Pavilion and  Travel Diaries by Xu Xiake. This dynasty pretended
to restore the Tran dynasty but occupied Vietnam instead. It ended
when Li Zicheng mutinied and Nurhaci led an invasion force. It began
when Zhu Yuanzhang, the White Lotus, and the Red Turbans captured
Dadu, Nanjing, and defeated the Yuan Dynasty. FTP, name this dynasty,
known for its pottery. Thetis Her sisters included Galatea, who was
loved by the Cyclops Polyphemus, and Amphitrite, who was the wife of
Poseidon. Her father was a shape-shifter and seer named Nereus, and
she herself took the shape of a lioness and a serpent before finally
agreeing to marry the mortal who tried to capture her. This deity
cared for Hephaestus on Lemnos after he was cast out from Olympus, a
debt that the god would repay twice to her son. A prophecy predicting
that her son would be stronger than his father prevented Zeus from
sleeping with her, but he was still indebted to her for her aid in
preventing an uprising by the other gods by summoning the monster
Briareus. For ten points, name this silver-footed Nereid, the wife of
Peleus and mother of Achilles. Founder effect First outlined by Ernst
Mayr, this concept can account for the unusually large deaf population
on Martha’s Vineyard and the smaller size of seeds in certain island
regions of Canada. It can result if population flows are constrained,
and it explains the high prevalence of Ellis-van Creveld syndrome in
Amish populations. A specific example of genetic drift, FTP, name the
effect that describes the decrease in genetic variation observed when
a small population separates from a larger population. 19\. In one
poem by this author, the narrator claims to have “raised the pyramids
above” the Nile and  “bathed in the Euphrates when dawns were young”.
And in another poem by this author, the narrator is instructed by his
teacher to “Go home and write / a First outlined by Ernst Mayr, this
concept can account for the unusually large deaf population on
Martha’s Vineyard and the smaller size of seeds in certain island
regions of Canada. It can result if population flows are constrained,
and it explains the high prevalence of Ellis-van Creveld syndrome in
Amish populations. A specific example of genetic drift, FTP, name the
effect that describes the decrease in genetic variation observed when
a small population separates from a larger population. Xerxes I
Herodotus wrote that this man once reviewed his forces and wept,
because none of them would be alive in a hundred years. He built two
bridges that connected Europe and Asia; the first was made of flax and
papyrus, while the second was made of ships. Themistocles tricked him
into a decisive naval battle after the battle of Artemisum. FTP, name
this Persian leader, who defeated the Greeks at Thermopylae, the son
of Darius I. Vienna (or Wien) One battle at this site featured a
victory by the mercenary Nicholas Graf of Salm over Grand Vizier
Ibrahim Pasha, came three years after the decisive Ottoman victory at
Mohacs that finished the independent Kingdom of Hungary. A second
battle at this city featured the defeat of Kara Mustafa Pasha at the
hands of the Holy League after a great charge led by the Winged
Hussars--the largest cavalry charge in history--  under the Polish
king Jan III Sobieski. Attacked in 1529 by Suleiman the Magnificent
and again in 1683, FTP name this central European Hapsburg capital
that dominated trade routes from the eastern  Mediterranean to western
Europe. Super Smash Brothers Brawl One hack for this video game allows
players to unlock Billy Mays as a costume for one character and the
final boss for the single-player game is a Blue humanoid called Tabuu,
the embodiment of "Subspace."  New stages added to this game include
New Pork City, Pictochat, and Frigate Orpheon, but it retains classic
stages from previous versions like Jungle Japes, Big Blue, and Final
Destination. This title saw the addition of third- party characters
like Solid Snake and Sonic the Hedgehog to the classic Nintendo lineup
of characters like Fox, Link, Samus, and Kirby. FTP name this Nintendo
Wii title that features an all-star cast of characters trying to knock
each other off of cliffs, the third iteration of the Super Smash
Brothers series. Frank Lloyd Wright He designed the First Unitarian
Meeting House in Wisconsin, along with the Price Tower in
Bartlesville, Oklahoma. His Usonian houses were designed to be
practical for middle class clients. A structure of his in Japan was
one of the few to survive a 1923 earthquake. Along with the Imperial
Hotel in Tokyo, this architect designed a residence for his friend
Edgar J. Kauffmann in Pennsylvania, dubbed Fallingwater. A disciple of
Louis Sullivan, one of this man’s last projects was the Guggenheim
museum in New York.  FTP, identify this American architect associated
with Chicago, who designed numerous Robie and Prairie houses. Richard
III At the end of one scene in this work the title character declares,
“Shine out, fair sun, till I have bought a glass, / That I may see my
shadow as I pass.” Anne Neville marries the title character, despite
his having killing her husband and his father. And other characters he
dispatches include King Edward and the Duke of Clarence. Opening with
the lines: “Now is the winter of our discontent, / Made glorious
summer by this son of York.” FTP name this Shakespearean tragedy about
a king who would give his “kingdom for a horse” as he dies on Bosworth
Field. Ravens In Siberian mythology, the creator-god Kutkh took the
form of one of these creatures, and Brahma was incarnated as one of
them. In China, one of these is a solar deity thought to inhabit the
sun, and they are messengers of the sun- god Helios in Greek myth. The
Morrigan often took the shape of this creature in Celtic myth, while
both the aborigines and the indigenous tribes of the American Pacific
Northwest claim that this creature brought fire to mankind. Claude
Lévi-Strauss claims that together with the coyote, this creature is
seen as a bridge with the afterlife due to its role as a scavenger,
and according to the Quran, they taught men how to bury the dead. For
ten points, name these birds exemplified in Norse myth by Odin’s
servants Huginn and Muninn. invertebrates Carolus Linnaeus’ original
taxonomy of living organisms divided this group of animals into two
categories: worms and insects. However, as this group encompasses 95%
of the kingdom Animalia, more divisions including Rotifera, Nemertea,
Cnidaria, and Arthropoda having since been created. Members of this
group have only one copy of the Hox genes and are found in all animal
subpylums except the Craniata subpylum of Chordata. FTP, name this
category of animals that have no backbone. Zoroastrianism or Mazdaism
An ancient sect of this religion worshiped a creator deity named
Zurvan and had a strong effect on Manichaeism. The head deity of this
religion is aided by beings called Yazatas, the greatest of which are
the Amesha Spentas. According to its scripture, the Avesta, these
beings oppose the evil daevas, who help the god of darkness, Angra
Mainyu. Although its adherents in Iran are persecuted today, this
faith is kept alive by the Parsis of India, and it is still strongly
associated with fire worship. For ten points, name this ancient
Persian religion which worships Ahura Mazda and is named after its
prophet, Zarathustra. William Faulkner One novel by this author that
contains elements of a murder mystery, sees the African-American Lucas
Beauchamp accused of murdering local white man, Vinson Gowrie. Besides
writing Intruder in the Dust, he also introduced Horace Benbow and
Temple Drake in Sanctuary and the enigmatic Joe Christmas in Light in
August. But he is most famous for a novel that chronicles the Bundren
family’s attempt to bury their matriarch in Jefferson and one that
portrays the fall of the Compson family through the eyes of the
suicidal Quentin and the mentally challenged Benjy. FTP, this is what
Southern writer of As I Lay Dying and The Sound and the Fury? simple
harmonic oscillators (accept equivalents of oscillator, prompt on
“harmonic oscillator,” accept “damped harmonic oscillator” before
“LC”) The equation of motion of these systems can be solved from a
second order homogenous differential equation, and they can be used to
characterize more complicated systems through Fourier analysis. One
example is an LC circuit, which consists of an inductor and a
capacitor. Unlike the damped and driven varieties of these, the motion
of these is always perfectly periodic, and in LC circuits the angular
frequency is given by one over the square root of the inductance times
the capacitance. FTP, name these systems in which energy is conserved
and whose motion can be described in terms of a sine function, such as
a pendulum or spring. 13\. Near the beginning of this poem, the
narrator tries to see far enough to where an object “bent in the
undergrowth”. And in the final stanza of this poem, the narrator
remarks that “ages and ages hence”, he will 2 The equation of motion
of these systems can be solved from a second order homogenous
differential equation, and they can be used to characterize more
complicated systems through Fourier analysis. One example is an LC
circuit, which consists of an inductor and a capacitor. Unlike the
damped and driven varieties of these, the motion of these is always
perfectly periodic, and in LC circuits the angular frequency is given
by one over the square root of the inductance times the capacitance.
FTP, name these systems in which energy is conserved and whose motion
can be described in terms of a sine function, such as a pendulum or
spring. Populist Party This movement reached its peak during a meeting
chaired over by Frances Willard, leader of the WCTU. That meeting,
held in Omaha, Nebraska, became this party’s platform. In this party’s
most successful year at the ballot box, James B Weaver won over a
million votes and four states. Emerging out of the Farmer’s alliance,
one of this party’s goals was realized with the passage of the
seventeenth amendment. This party was short lived, though, in large
part thanks to the Cross of Gold speech. Merging with William Jennings
Bryan and the Democrats for the election of 1896, FTP, identify this
party that advocated free silver, direct election of senators, the
abolition of national banks, and government control of railroads.
Albert Camus This author wrote about the strained marriage of Janine
and Marcel in “The Adulterous Woman”, which appears with such stories
as “The Silent Men” and “The Growing Stone” in his collection, The
Exile Kingdom. One novel by this author sees Father Paneloux blame the
citizens of Oran for an epidemic that his struck them, while another
contains the trial of a man who shot “The Arab” which focuses on the
fact that he did not cry at his mother’s funeral, Meursault. FTP, this
is what author of The Plague and The Stranger, a French- Algerian
Existentialist? piano concertos (prompt on concerto) The movements
"Manny's Gym" and "Hail, Bop," appear in John Adams's composition in
this genre, entitled "Century Rolls." Bartók didn't live to
orchestrate the last seventeen bars of his third of these. One by
Ravel opens with a whip crack and is often known as the one "in G."
The middle movement of Beethoven's fourth essay in this genre is often
associated with Orpheus and the Furies. Mozart's ninth is an E-flat
major work known as the "Jeunehomme," while another of these E-flat is
Beethoven's fifth and last.  A famous one in C minor opens with a
series of bell-like tolls in the solo part. For 10 points, identify
this type of piece, examples of which include Rachmaninoff's second in
C minor and Beethoven's "Emperor,"  written for orchestra and a
certain keyboard instrument. peroxisomes Proteins targeted to this
organelle contain a series of serine-lysine- leucine residues known as
the SLK  sequence. Defects in its ability to process phytanic acid
results in Refsum disease, while mutations to its PTSR receptors lead
to Zellweger syndrome. Containing a core with urate oxidase, this
organelle is responsible for plasmalogen synthesis as well as the beta
oxidation of fatty acids to acetyl CoA, though it is better known for
its detoxification abilities, a fact which explains its prevalence in
liver parenchyma cells.  Also known as a glyoxysome in germinating
seeds, FTP, name this organelle that decomposes hydrogen peroxide via
catalase activity. Nash Equilibirum Rousseau famously wrote about a
variation of this idea with his analysis of the Stag Hunt. Weak and
Strong versions of this exist, and Cournot analyzed a variant of this
concept in his model of duopoly, which gives the amount that both
firms will choose to produce if they take into account the other’s
actions. Many of these can exist for a given model, and determining
one of these is often found using a payoff matrix.  FTP, identify this
concept from game theory, which gives the solution to a game in which
no player can improve himself by changing his strategy unilaterally,
given what the other players are doing. One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s
Nest The narrator of this novel believes the place where he lives runs
a fog machine and calls society’s means of keeping people in line “The
Combine”. And later reveals he is not really deaf by voting to watch
the World Series in a group meeting. One character in this novel has a
neurotic obsession with cleanliness, George Sorenson. And other
characters include the articulate, closeted homosexual, Harding, and
the stuttering, mother-dominated Billy Bibbit. Chief Bromden narrates
the tale of patients of the psychiatric ward in, FTP, what novel in
which con man Randle McMurphy fights the tyrannical rule of Nurse
Ratched by Ken Kesey? longbow Skeletons of users of this implement
have been identified by deformed shoulder and arm bones on one side of
their body, misshapen by the tremendous force--up to 900 Newtons--
required to properly operate this implement. Its users had to train
from childhood, but with an experienced operator it was vastly more
efficient and accurate than its crank-operated or crude gunpowder
Early Renaissance contemporaries. FTP, name this tall weapon used to
especially great effect against bogged-down heavy cavalry by the Welsh
and English, notably in 1415 at Agincourt. Gustav Mahler A brief
movement entitled "Purgatorio" appears in a work by this composer
completed by Deryck Cooke, his tenth symphony. His fifth symphony
begins with a funeral march in C-sharp minor and contains a famous
Adagietto movement, A finch asks the singer, "Isn't it a fine world?"
in the song "Ging heut Morgen übers Feld," which is quoted extensively
in his first symphony. That song comes from the cycle Songs of a
Wayfarer, and the symphony is nicknamed the "Titan." His second
symphony, in C minor, uses texts by Klopstock, and his eighth symphony
sets the Latin hymn "Veni Creator Spiritus" and is nicknamed for its
large performing forces. For 10 points, identify this composer of the
"Resurrection" Symphony and the Symphony of a Thousand. Don Quixote
Anselmo tests the fidelity of his wife Camilla in an interpolated
novella appearing in this novel  “The Man Who Was Recklessly Curious”.
And minor episodes in this novel include the love triangle between
Ferdinand and Cardenio, for the hand of Lucinda. The protagonist wears
a wash-basin that he stole from a barber, believing it to be the
helmet of Mambrino. More famous episodes from this novel involve the
protagonist mistaking a flock of sheep for an army and a windmill for
a giant. FTP, the title character dreams of Dulcinea and is
accompanied on his adventures by Sancho Panza in what novel by Miguel
de  Cervantes? A Streetcar Named Desire In one scene in this play, the
protagonist is terrified by a blind Mexican woman, selling tin
flowers. A polka called the “Varsouviana” plays during a speech in
which the protagonist recounts telling her husband that he disgusted
her, which lead to his suicide. And the protagonist also reminisces
about her former suitor, Shep Huntleigh, and her former estate, Belle
Rêve. After beating his wife for interrupting his poker game, one
character begs forgiveness by bellowing her name in the street. FTP,
while staying with her sister Stella, Blanche Dubois clashes with the
animalistic Stanley Kowalski in what play by Tennessee Williams?
Aristotle This man’s Metaphysics focuses on separating essential from
accidental properties of objects, while his Physics lists four types
of causes and five elements of matter. . He is called “the master of
those who know” in Dante’s Inferno, and Bertrand Russell claimed that
every intellectual advance must begin with by attacking this
philosopher. This man’s Politics stressed balance between democratic
and oligarchic governments, while his  Poetics emphasize the
importance of catharsis. He wrote extremely detailed works on zoology,
but is better known for his theory of a tripartite soul. He is most
famous, however, for his ethical theories, which claim that the goal
of human existence eudaimonia, which is achieved by living a life of
virtue. For ten points, name this author of the Nichomachean Ethics
who founded the Lyceum in Athens, and was the student of Plato and
teacher of Alexander the Great. transition states (accept activated
complexes before named) Since they are impossible to isolate, they are
very difficult to study; femtochemical IR spectroscopy, however, can
provide a useful approximation of their structure. These are
identified by the coordinates of the saddle points of the potential
energy surface and hypothesized in arrow-pushing reaction mechanism
diagrams. Although they are absent in phase transitions, the
instability and high energy of these  configurations gives plots of
potential energy versus reaction coordinates their characteristic
hill-shaped appearance. E to the power of the opposite of the energy
of these minus the energy of the products divided by the universal gas
constant times the absolute temperature gives the rate constant, and
that energy is known as the Arrhenius or activation energy. Also known
as activated complexes, FTP name this high-energy molecular
configuration found between reactants and products—and between those
and chemical  intermediates. Rudyard Kipling One poem by this author
lists a series of conditionals that if fulfilled will allow the
addressee to “be a man, my son!”, while another speaks of the titular
race’s obligation to fight “the savage wars of peace”.  Besides poems
“If—“ and “The White Man’s Burden”,  he is also know for novels such
as one that follows the son of a railroad tycoon, Harvey Cheyne,
called Captains Courageous. But he is perhaps best remembered for
children’s stories, such as a collection that explains “How the
Leopard Got His Spots”, the Just- So Stories. FTP, this is what Anglo-
Indian author who wrote about the panther Bagheera, the bear Baloo,
and the man-cub Mowgli in The Jungle Book? dopamine This molecule is
degraded into D-O-P-A-C before conversion to homovanillic acid.
Utilized mostly by neurons localized to the arcuate nucleus of the
hypothalamus, the ventral tegmental area of the midbrain, and the
substantia nigra, it is also produced in the medulla of the adrenal
glands. This catecholamine, which is often associated with the
pleasure and reward systems of the brain, is a precursor to
norepinephrine, and it can be converted from l-tyrosine via
intermediary formation of l-dihydroxyphenylalanine. FTP, name this
neurotransmitter whose precursor compound L-DOPA has found use in the
treatment of Parkinson’s  disease. surface tension The Wilhelmy plate
method can be used to measure this quantity, and another method
involves a  platinum ring and is named for du Noüy. The Eötvös rule
predicts the value of this quantity given density, molar mass, and
critical temperature. Type II pneumocytes are responsible for reducing
this quantity in alveoli, helping gas exchange. Detergents lower this
quantity that is responsible for capillary action and the formation of
a meniscus. FTP, identify this quantity that results from the
attractions between liquid molecules and allows for water striders to
walk on water. Atlas Shrugged In one episode in this novel, a
government worker assigned to survey one of the protagonists dies
warning that protagonist of a government plot. At Cherryl Brooks'
wedding, another character, a student of Hugh Akston, delivers a
speech on "the root of money." That character, Francisco D'anconia
owns the world's largest copper empire, but bankrupts himself along
with other "looters" and "moochers." FTP, Dagny Taggert and Hank
Rearden attempt to save America's industrial infrastructure in what
objectivist novel, written by Ayn Rand and featuring John Galt.
Publius Vergilius Maro This poet detailed aspects of farming such as
raising livestock and beekeeping in one work, while another collection
is a set of ten pastoral poems modeled on the Idylls of Theocritus;
those are his Georgics and his Eclogues. In his famous appearance
outside of his own work, this author guides the narrator through hell
in Dante’s Inferno. While the namesake character of his famous work
battles with Turnus, flees burning Troy with Anchises on his back, and
has an affair in Carthage with Dido. FTP, this is what Roman poet who
wrote about the founding of Rome in the Aeneid? Snell's law (accept
also Descartes's law and the Snell–Descartes law; prompt on the law of
refraction before mention) One way to derive this is by applying the
general boundary conditions of Maxwell’s equations. Another way to
derive this law uses Fermat’s principle of least time. In birefringent
materials, the ordinary ray obeys this law, while the extraordinary
ray does not because this law only holds for isotropic media. This law
states that sine theta one over sine theta two is equal to v one over
v two, where v is the local velocity of light. FTP, name this law that
describes the refraction of light at the boundary of two media. Tariff
of Abominations, or of 1828 One famous response to this piece of
legislation was drawn up by William Harper. Another reaction to this
piece of legislation saw Robert Hayne attempt to unite southern
interests with those of the west. A force bill was passed through by
Andrew Jackson in the hopes of quieting some of the furor induced by
this piece of legislation. The most forceful response to this, the
South Carolina Exposition and Protest, was written by Jackson’s own
vice president. The controversy caused by this piece of legislation
was not dispelled until an 1833 compromise tariff was passed with the
help of Henry Clay. FTP, identify this suitably named tariff, which
sparked a nullification crisis headed by John C. Calhoun. French Wars
of Religion Accept War of the Three Henries early This conflict began
with the Massacre of Vassy and included battles at Saint-Denis and
Ivry. It featured involvement by the Habsburgs and Tudors, for whom it
was a sort of proxy war. This conflict climaxed in the so-called "War
of the Three Henries" between the the identically-named rulers of
Guise, France, and Navarre, but Henry of Guise was executed and Henry
of France assassinated by a friar,  meaning the last Henry standing
was Henry of Navarre of the House of Bourbon. This conflict ended with
the Edict of Nantes and its most famous episode was the St.
Bartholomew's Day Massacre. FTP, give the straightforward name of this
16th-century conflict between Catholics and Huguenots, whose victor,
Henry IV, remarked "Paris is well worth a mass." The Thinker This
sculpture was originally commissioned by the Musee des Arts
Decoratifs. A copy of this sculpture is located in front of the
philosophy hall at Columbia University. The original was later moved
in front of the Pantheon. Unlike the Monument to Balzac created by the
same sculptor, this statue was originally titled the Poet. It was
originally meant to represent Dante contemplating his Divine Comedy in
front of the Gates of Hell, also by the same sculptor as this work.
Depicting a man in an anatomically impossible pose because of wrist
strain, FTP, name this work of Rodin which depicts a man in deep
thought. Anglo-Zulu War This conflict started after an ultimatum
issued by the lieutenant governor of Natal returned no answer and Lord
Chelmsford commenced an invasion. Chelmsford was defeated by a
numerically and tactically  superior force at Isandlwana, but the
British successfully defended at Rorke’s Drift and broke the forces
under their adversary Cetshwayo at Ulundi. FTP, name this war, which
the British waged against a South African empire. planets Their
existence can be confirmed through techniques such as astrometry,
radial velocity, and pulsar timing. The Kepler mission seeks to find
one variety of these, which are defined as objects with true masses
below the limiting mass for the thermonuclear fusion of deuterium. The
discovery of Eris forced a  redefinition of these celestial bodies,
and satellites orbiting them will eventually break apart if they are
within the Roche limit. FTP, what is this group of objects to which
Pluto no longer belongs. Alfred the Great This king only rose to the
throne after his three elder brothers ruled in succession. He made a
treaty with  his enemy Guthrum to secure his kingdom from the harrying
of the Great Heathen Army. Before that  treaty, Guthrum had made him
flee to the marshes, but this king was able to maintain the loyalty of
his  people and a system of ealdormen and thegns that could muster the
fyrds so that this king could deal a  decisive defeat to Guthrum at
the Battle of Ethandun. This king is often held to be the father of
the English  navy. The son of Æthelwulf, he succeeded his brother
Æthelræd in 871 and was in turn succeeded by his  son Edward the
Elder. FTP, name this king of Wessex, the first and only native
English king to be known  as „the Great.‟ Oliver Twist In this novel,
the protagonist runs away after beating Noah Claypole in a fight and
aquires a job where he  is told he will be making handkerchiefs. In
another episode, a character overhears two men agreeing to  throw a
ring and necklace that belonged to the protagonist's mother off a
bridge. That character, Nancy, is  later beaten to death by Bill
Sykes. The protagonist donates part of his inheritance to his half-
brother  Monks, and finally is adopted by Mr. Brownlow. FTP, name this
novel, featuring the Artful Dodger and  Fagin, by Charles Dickins
about an orphan who iconically asks for more gruel. Epstein-Barr virus
A positive response to the Paul-Bunnell heterophile antibody test
indicates infection by this virus, and  the Miller-Hutt-Fletcher
process is one way it can target cells. Marmoset cell immortality is a
result of this  virus which can be responsible for both inhibition of
the IL-10 receptor and promotion of autoimmune  disease states through
polyclonal B cell expansion. FTP, name this B-cell infecting virus
linked to  conditions like nasopharyngeal carcinoma, oral hairy
leukoplakia, Burkitt‟s lymphoma, Hodgkin‟s  Disease, and
mononucleosis. Jar-Jar Binks He appears in only one scene in his third
film, a funeral scene for the Queen of his home planet, while in  his
second film appearence, this character initiates a vote to grant
Chancellor Palpatine "emergency  powers" precipitating the rise of the
Galactic Empire. This character is originally saved from being crushed
by a Trade Federation tank, leading him to convince Boss Nass to help
the protagonists escape from Theed.  FTP name this bumbling Gungan who
first appeared in "The Phantom Menace" widely criticized by critics
for being too comical and childish. “The Second Coming” The second
stanza describes a creature with “gaze blank and pitiless as the sun”
whose “twenty centuries  of stony sleep were vexed to nightmare by a
rocking cradle”. While the first stanza describes how “mere  anarchy
is loosed upon the world” when “the falcon cannot hear the falconer”,
and “the best lack all  conviction while the worst are full of
passionate intensity”. FTP, the phrases “Slouching towards  Bethlehem”
and “things fall apart” originate in what poem by William Butler Yeats
that describes an event  foretold by the Book of Revelation? Albrecht
Durer One of his works while in the Employ of Maximilian I was
entitled The Triumphal Arch. This man  sketched a Rhinoceros which was
the first seen in Europe since Roman times. This man made many
journeys to Italy, painting some of the first landscapes along the
way. His Young Hare was a pioneering  work in watercolors, while one
of his more famous works depicts a Knight marching along with two
other,  sinister figures, Death and the Devil. Perhaps his most famous
work depicts a sad faced angel with an  hourglass above his head about
to write something. FTP, identify this leading figure of the Northern
Renaissance, famous for woodcuts like Melancholia I. Ramses II One of
this man‟s victories in the early years of his reign came against the
Shardana pirates, who would  become one of the “Sea Peoples” that
wreaked havoc across the eastern Mediterranean in the reign of the
next king with this king‟s name. This king did everything on a large
scale: he fought Muwatalli of the  Hittites near the Orontes River at
Kadesh in the largest chariot battle in history; was the longest-
reigning  pharaoh; and fathered nearly one hundred children. FTP name
this great Egyptian pharaoh of the  nineteenth dynasty, known to the
Greeks and Shelley as Ozymandias. Washington Irving Contemporary
historians blame this author for perpetuating the myth that title
explorer sought to prove  that the earth is not flat in his The Life
of Voyages of Christopher Columbus, which he wrote while Minister to
Spain, a time that also saw him write his Tales of the Alhambra. In
one short story by this author, the title character naps under a tree
after a game of nine-pins only to wake up twenty years later, while in
another  story the Headless Horseman pursues Ichabod Crane. FTP, this
is what early 19th Century American author  whose The Sketch Book of
Geoffrey Crayon contained the stories “Rip Van Winkle”  and “The
Legend of Sleepy Hollow” ? Le Chatelier’s Principle or Principle of Le
Chatelier This concept qualitatively expresses an intuition about the
phenomena described quantitatively by a  certain set of equations, and
it can be used to predict that increasing temperature will increase
the yield of  an endothermic reaction or that decreasing pressure will
push a reaction toward the side with fewer moles  of gaseous products.
FTP, name this principle that states that a chemical system at
equilibrium will  respond in opposition to disturbances to that
equilibrium. Emile Durkheim A collection of this man‟s courses on the
origins of socialism were published after this man‟s death by  Marcel
Mauss. His Rules of the Sociological method was an attempt to found a
method which would  guarantee sociology‟s truly scientific character.
Later this man analyzed how religion contributes to the  maintenance
of social order in his The Elementary Forms of Religious Life. In
perhaps his most famous  work, this author of the Division of Labor in
Society classified the titular phenomenon into four types,  egoistic,
altruistic, anomic, and fatalistic. FTP, identify this pioneering
French sociologist, the author of  Suicide. Battle of Tours (or
Poitier)  2 Most Christian chroniclers and historians through the 19th
century, including Edward Gibbon, thought  this battle of
macrohistorical importance, many modern historians, however, believe
that the Muslim army  under Abdul al-Rahman was nothing more than
raiding party returning from profitable plunder at the  monastery of
St. Martin in southwest France. Tactically, this battle was notable in
that the Franks used  only well-disciplined infantry, rather than the
knightly cavalry that was being developed at the time and  would later
characterize the medieval French army. Marking the highwater mark of
Islamic expamsion  into Europe, FTP, name this 732 battle that paved
the way for the Carolingian empire and was won by  Charles Martel.
skepticism It was famously refuted by Hilary Putnam and G. E. Moore,
while Zhuangzi‟s butterfly dream is  considered an Eastern equivalent
of this movement. George Berkeley claimed that his immaterialism way
the only method of avoiding this philosophy, and al-Ghazali claimed
that faith was necessary to avoid this  in his The Incoherence of the
Philosophers. David Hume‟s discussion of the problem of induction led
him  to be branded an adherent of this philosophy, and the first of
Descartes‟ Meditations on First Philosophy  presents both the Evil
Genius and Dream arguments for this view. In the ancient world, this
philosophy was  associated with the middle period of Plato‟s Academy,
but was more famously exhibited by a school that  took its name from
Pyrrho of Elis. For ten points, name this philosophical school of
Sextus Empiricus  which claimed that all knowledge can be called into
doubt. Die Zauberflöte (or The Magic Flute) The so-called "threefold
chord," presented in this opera's overture, appears again near the
beginning of Act II, signifying that the choir deems the lead tenor
worthy. In one quintet, a character sings "Hm, hm,  hm, hm" because
his mouth has been padlocked for claiming to have saved the tenor's
life. When the tenor  is unable to respond to his lover, she believes
he is no longer in love with her and sings the aria "Ach, ich fühl's."
A glockenspiel, representing a set of bells, accompanies the aria "Ein
Mädchen oder Weibchen,"  and another character reaches high F in both
of her arias, the second of which is the revenge aria "Der Hölle
Rache," in which she urges her daughter to kill Sarastro. Featuring
the Queen of the Night, Pamina,  Tamino, and Papageno, for 10 points,
identify this German opera by Mozart. neutrons The ISIS facility, at
Rutherford Appleton Laboratory in Oxfordshire, United Kingdom, is a
source for  muons and these particles. Its antiparticle was discovered
by Bruce Cork, and the R-process and S-process  are different ways in
which they can be captured by a nucleus. These particles, when free,
undergo beta  decay with a mean lifetime of about 15 minutes. Made up
of one up quark and two down quarks, it was  discovered by James
Chadwick. FTP, identify this particle whose number differs in
different isotopes of the  same element, a subatomic particle with
zero charge. Pontius Pilate He is revered as a saint in the Ethiopian
Orthodox Church, and his wife is traditionally held to be  named
Claudia Procula. Other traditions hold that he was born in Scotland
and committed suicide in Gaul.  He famously asked, “What is truth?”
when Jesus Christ informed him of his mission, and repeatedly asked
Jesus whether he believed himself to be King of the Jews. Although
only Luke records his attempt to hand  Jesus over to Herod for
judgment, all four gospels make it clear that he did not find Jesus
guilty of the  accusations made by the Sanhedrin. For ten points, name
the Roman governor of Judea who washed his  hands of Jesus Christ‟s
crucifixion. Philip Roth One novel by this author focuses on the trial
of war criminal John Demjanjuk and hunting down an  imposter using the
author‟s name, while another imagines what would have happened had
Charles  Lindberg become president. Besides Operation Shylock  and The
Plot Against America, another novel by this author tells the story of
a professor who was fired for racism, though he is secretly black
passing for  white, Coleman Silk. While, the title character of his
most famous novel has girlfriends nicknamed The  Pilgrim, The Pumpkin,
and The Monkey. This is, FTP, what author of The Human Stain, American
Pastoral,  and Portnoy’s Complaint. monocots or monocotyledons  3 They
do not exhibit secondary growth of their stems, and their vascular
tissue is not arranged in  concentric rings but rather in the
scattered atactostele formation. Vascular bundles in their stems
feature a  covering of parenchyma but no pith, and their pollen
contains only one furrow. Roots are adventitious and  can develop from
buds other than the apical meristem shoot, while their stomata are
arranged parallel to the  long axis of leaves, all of which feature
parallel venation. FTP, name the angiosperm class of plants that
contains flower segments arranged in multiples of threes and only one
seed leaf. Hermann Hesse One novel by this author was originally
published under the name of its protagonist, Emil Sinclair,  while
another describes the efforts of the students of the Waldzell in
Castalia to become Magister Ludi. In  addition to Demian  and The
Glass Bead Game, he also wrote a book in which Harry Haller reads a
pamphlet which helps him release the spirit of the titular animal
within him, after which he stabs Hermione  in the Magic Theatre and
another in which the title character journeys with his companion
Govinda to seek  out enlightenment. FTP, this is what German-Swiss
author of Steppenwolf and Siddhartha? Coriolis effect This inertial
force, described by a 19th-century French engineer and mathematician
in 1835, often aids  the formation of jet streams and western boundary
currents. It is also responsible for Rossby and Kelvin  waves as well
as other types of waves found in the ocean and atmosphere. This effect
is often naively used  to suggest that toilets flush in different
directions, depending on whether they are in the northern or  southern
hemisphere. FTP, name the effect responsible for counterclockwise
movement of cyclones in the  northern hemisphere and clockwise
movement in the southern hemisphere. Supreme Leader or Grand Ayatollah
or Imam Ruhollah Mousavi Khomeini (not Ali  Khameini) This man was
opposed to the top-down Westernization and secularization of his
country, in particular the  “White Revolution” of 1963 that pushed for
women’s rights, literacy, a more liberal economy, and other  changes.
After disputes with the government, one of which got him slapped by
the prime minster, this man spent fourteen years in exile in Najaf,
Iraq, holy to Shi’a. During his exile, this cleric solidified his
thoughts about the legitimacy of Sharia law and the key role of
mullahs to interpret it in government. He also vowed not to return to
his country until its leader, Mohammed Reza Pahlavi, left. When this
firebrand returned to his country, he galvanized the people to tear
down the provisional government and institute a Muslim theocracy in
place of the shah. FTP, name this Grand Ayatollah and Supreme Leader
of the  Islamic Revolution under whom the Iran Hostage Crisis
occurred. piezoelectric effect or piezoelectricity The fuses in some
rocket propelled grenades make use of this effect, while sensors
utilizing it can be used to measure vibrations. Like Ferromagnetism,
dipoles in materials exhibiting this effect are often  aligned in
Weiss domains. One of the most common uses of it is in cigarette
lighters where a material with this property is struck by a spring-
loaded hammer. The converse of this effect, electrostriction, allows
bones to slightly change their structure in the presence of an
electric field. Discovered by Jacques and Pierre Curie in 1880, FTP,
is this effect which is most prominently displayed in compounds like
barium  titanate, berlinite, Rochelle salts, and quartz. Unicorn Adult
Swim recently released a flash game requiring players to control a
robotic one of these animals while chasing butterflies and crushing
stars. Wolfmother sang a song about a "white" one of these animals on
their eponymous album and Honda produces a line of motorcycles named
after this animal. A flash  video featuring two of these animals sees
them meet a magical leopleurodon, cross a bridge of hope and  wonder
and finally reach the titular destination, Candy Mountain. The narwhal
is often cited as a possible of source of, FTP what fictional animal
with a flowing mane, cloven hoof, and giant horn that distinguishes it
from a horse. Gaetano Donizetti Jane Seymour sings with the title
character in the duet "Sul suo capo aggravi un Dio" in his opera Anna
Bolena, or Anne Boleyn. The Duchess of Krakenthorp is a spoken role in
another opera by this composer, which contains an aria that Juan Diego
Florez encored at La Scala, the first in 74 years. That aria contains
nine high Cs and is called "Ah! mes amis." In another opera, the title
character tells of seeing the ghost of a girl by a fountain, and that
opera features the sextet "Che mi frena" and a mad scene following the
title character's murder of her groom Arturo. That opera is based on a
novel by Sir Walter Scott. For 10 points, identify this composer of
The Daughter of the Regiment and Lucia di Lammermoor. Benedict Arnold
This man’s commands at the battles of Ridgefield and Valcour lake were
unsuccessful. Earlier he had  roughed up a man who was threatening to
reveal his 16,000 pound trade deficit he had acquired while  working
for the Sons of Liberty. Although this man fought bravely at Saratoga
and suffered a wounded  leg, he was passed over for a promotion, which
may have served to inspire his most famous act. The  capture of John
Andre, foiled, FTP, what man’s plans to turn over his new command of
West Point to the  British? Las Meninas or The Handmaidens Pablo
Picasso painted a series of 58 colorful copies of this painting. The
red cross of the Order of Santiago was added to one person’s chest
several years after the painting’s finish, possibly by King Philip IV
himself. This painting includes a dog lying in the foreground; two
women of the title profession; and two dwarfs. This painting shows a
chamberlain who may be related to the artist standing in a doorway in
the back of the room, looking on at the scene of the infantes getting
ready to pose for their portrait. FTP, name this royal portrait of the
Infanta Margarita whose artist showed himself at an easel at the left
of the painting and was named Diego Velázquez. Minos This man
commanded Polydius of Argos to find and resurrect his dead son, and
later to teach this son, Glaucus, the art of divination. He defeated
king Nisus of Megara with the help of that king’s daughter  Scylla,
who fell in love with this man. He rose to power by killing the ruler
Asterion and banishing his brothers Sarpedon and Rhadamanthys, the
latter of which would share his role in Hades. He was killed in  his
bath by the daughters of King Cocalus of Sicily during his search for
a man who threaded a spiral  seashell by tying a string to an ant.
That man escaped this ruler’s island after designing both a mechanical
cow for his wife Pasiphae and the labyrinth that held her son, the
Minotaur. For ten points, name this judge of the dead and king of
Crete. red blood cells or erythrocytes Stacks of these cells are known
as rouleuax, and they can be detected via the direct Coombs test.
Their surface antigenic response can be described by the Colton,
Diego, and Duffy systems, and they are  characterized by high levels
of both CD47 and Kidd glycoproteins. Containing spectrin and ankyrin
in their cytoskeleton and known for their lack of a nucleus, these
cells are produced in bone marrow in a process stimulated by
erythropoietin. FTP, name these oxygen-carrying, hemoglobin-containing
cells found in  arteries and veins. Immanuel Kant This man’s less
famous works include the Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics, while
his most important work attempts to determine whether a priori
synthetic judgments are possible. In that work, this author
distinguishes the noumenal and phenomenal realms, and states his
intention to create the equivalent of the Copernican revolution in
metaphysics. His most famous idea in ethics can be stated either as
the  necessity of regarding human beings as ends in themselves. For
ten points, name this founder of German  idealism, who developed the
categorical imperative in his Groundwork for the Metaphysics of Morals
and claimed that things in themselves could not be perceived in his
Critique of Pure Reason. Beloved The epigraph to this novel comes from
Romans, and begins “I will call them my people, which were  not my
people.” One character in this work receives a tree-shaped scar when
she is beaten by a group of  men who also steal her breast milk. She
agrees to have sex with an engraver to get her child’s name carved on
a tombstone. FTP, name this novel about the lives of Denver, Paul D,
and Sethe, who live in a house  haunted by a slain baby, a work by
Toni Morrison. triple entente The foundations of this agreement were
laid during the Tangier Crisis, when the countries involved in the
agreement worked to secure distinct spheres of influence in North
Africa. Another country entered into this agreement after its
humiliating loss in a 1905 war with Japan, thereby causing the country
in question to seek alliances elsewhere in order to secure its own
position. Nations opposing this agreement had  threatened to develop a
vast global empire and create a strong navy, threatening the absolute
maritime  dominance of one of the countries in the aforementioned
agreement. FTP, give the name of this alliance  between France,
Russia, and Great Britain opposing the Central Powers during World War
I. 13\. In one poem by this author, the speaker has visions of a ball
in Venice while playing the titular piece, while in another, the
speaker that superb craftsmanship but lack of inspiration have caused
him to be  2 The foundations of this agreement were laid during the
Tangier Crisis, when the countries involved in the agreement worked to
secure distinct spheres of influence in North Africa. Another country
entered into this agreement after its humiliating loss in a 1905 war
with Japan, thereby causing the country in question to seek alliances
elsewhere in order to secure its own position. Nations opposing this
agreement had  threatened to develop a vast global empire and create a
strong navy, threatening the absolute maritime  dominance of one of
the countries in the aforementioned agreement. FTP, give the name of
this alliance  between France, Russia, and Great Britain opposing the
Central Powers during World War I. titanium Its nitride form is used
in some protective coatings, while the chloride of this element is
functional as a Ziegler-Natta catalyst for polyolefins production. Its
strength and ability to osseointegrate make it effective in medical
implants, and its dioxide has found uses in white pigments,
photocatalysts, and sunscreens. The ninth most abundant element in the
Earth’s crust, it can be extracted from ilmenite and rutile using
either the Hunter process or the commercialized Kroll process. FTP,
name this corrosion- resistant transition metal that has a higher
strength-to-weight ratio than aluminum, with atomic number 22 and
symbol Ti. The Necklace or La Parure The protagonist of this work is
described as suffering endlessly from the poorness of her house, and
feeling she was born for luxury. Tears over having nothing to wear
cause her husband to give her the four-hundred francs he had been
saving to buy himself a gun. The plot thickens after the Minister of
Education’s ball, when the protagonist realizes she has lost something
she was wearing. She, Mathilde, and her  husband, Monsieur Loisel are
therefore forced to labor in poverty for ten years to replace it. FTP,
the title object, borrowed from Madame Forestier, is revealed at the
end to be a fake in what short story by Guy de Maupassant? Runnymeade
During the reign of Alfred the Great, Witanagemot meetings were held
at this location. A monument  celebrating a famous event that took
place here was designed by the American Bar Association. The
topography of this place is classified as “Thames Basin lowland.” The
most important even that occurred here followed the defeat of Otto IV
by Philip Augustus at the battle of Bouvines. FTP, identify this
location that saw Otto IV’s ally, King John, forced to sign a document
that granted protections to English nobles and thus established the
basis of English common law, the Magna Carta. Harold Pinter In a radio
play by this author, Edward discusses his fears of growing old with
his wife Oliver, and his fear of a silent character in the play, the
Matchseller. That play is A Silent Ache. No Man’s Land  and A Kind of
Alaska are among his “memory plays”, but he is most famous for his
“comedies of menace”, which include one in which Teddy introduces his
new wife Ruth to his family for the first time and one in which
Goldberg and McCann disrupt the title event planned for Stanley
Webber. FTP, this is what British  playwright of The Homecoming and
The Birthday Party? Pythagorean theorem A proof of this theorem by
President James A. Garfield involves the calculation of the area of a
right trapezoid by different methods. Another common method of proving
this theorem is by inscribing a square  at an angle inside of a larger
square, and calculating area of the square both as a whole and as a
sum of the component triangles and smaller square. A special case of
the law of cosines, FTP name this theorem  describing the relationship
between the length of the legs and the hypotenuse of a right triangle.
One Hundred Years of Solitude  or Cien años de soledad  3 A powerful
symbol in this work is the tiny golden fish one of the major
characters consistently crafts after losing his memory; that character
shows both intricate artistic capability as well as a mastery of brute
force, as he has led thirty-two civil war campaigns (all of which he
loses) and has fathered seventeen  children, all adopting his name, by
seventeen mothers. Aureliano, the aforementioned character, was the
product of an incestuous relationship between José Arcadio and Úrsula
Iguarán, second cousins and the  patriarchs of the Buendía family.
FTP, name this classic of Latin American Magical Realism taking place
in the fictional village of Macondo, the magnum opus of the Colombian
author Gabriel García Márquez. Bernoulli's principle This principle
can be derived from the law of conservation of energy, and a
particular case of this is Torricelli’s theorem. Another effect
derived from this is the Venturi effect, which describes a reduction
of pressure under certain conditions. This principle holds only for
inviscid flow and can be applied to gases at low Mach number. FTP,
name this principle, which states that an increase in the speed of a
fluid can occurs simultaneously with a decrease in pressure or
potential energy, and which can be used to explain the  phenomena of
lift and curveballs. South-East Asia This region of the world is
generally characterized by hot and humid weather, with monsoons in
June  and December bringing heavy seasonal rainfall. The association
containing this region's countries currently has ten members, though
East Timor will be a logical future member. Home to the world's
largest Muslim  nation, where President Barack Obama spent part of his
childhood, it is the most ecologically diverse place on Earth. Located
between China and Australia, FTP, name this region in Asia, containing
countries such  as Thailand, Malaysia, the Philippines and Indonesia.
momentum In relativistic mechanics, this quantity is multiplied by the
Lorentz factor, and along with kinetic energy, it is conserved in a
certain process in which the coefficient of restitution is one. An
object that is moving in any reference frame will be observed to have
this vector quantity in that frame. It’s conservation can be
demonstrated using Newton’s cradle as well as in elastic collisions,
but some of it is lost when the colliding bodies stick together in
inelastic collisions. FTP, identify this quantity, which comes in
linear and angular varieties, and when multiplied with velocity gives
force. fugue "All the world is a joke" are the words to the one that
closes Verdi's Falstaff, and the first movement of Beethoven's string
quartet opus 131 is this type of piece. Brahms wrote a set of
variations and one of these based on a theme by Handel, and twelve of
these pieces are separated by eleven interludes in Paul  Hindemith's
Ludus tonalis. The "Of Science" section of Richard Strauss's Also
Sprach Zarathustra is one of these employing all twelve notes of the
chromatic scale. One element of this type of piece can be real or
tonal; that is the answer, which is a repetition of the subject in a
different voice. For 10 points, identify this type of composition
paired with preludes in The Well- Tempered Clavier by Bach, who also
wrote a piece called The Art of them. Cardinal Richelieu One nearly
successful attempt to remove this man from power was pioneered by the
Marquis of Cinq-Mars. Another unsuccessful attempt against this man is
remembered as the Day of the Dupes, when not even the influence of the
King’s mother could remove this man from power. This man led an army
to besiege the city of La Rochelle, a part of his plan to weaken
Hugenout power within the country. Although leader of a catholic
country, this man hated the Habsburgs more than he hated protestants,
and so persuaded his country to go to war against the Holy Roman
Empire in the Thirty Years War. FTP, identify this French minister to
Louis XIII. Jack Kerouac This author wrote about Jack Duluoz’
friendship with Cody Pomeray in several novels including Visions of
Cody, Desolation Angels, and a novel named after a cabin in Bixby
canyon owned by the character Lorenzo Mansanto, Big Sur. This author
wrote a book-length jazz poem in 242 “choruses” called Mexico City
Blues. But he is best known for a book with such characters as Old
Bull Lee, Carlo Marx, and a fictionalized depiction of Neal Cassady,
named Sal Paradise. FTP, this is what American author who depicted
himself as Sal Paradise in On the Road? Crimean War The first war to
be photographed extensively and the first war to utilize modern
devices such as the telegraph and the railroad, this conflict was
instigated when the leader of one of the warring nations insisted on
sending forces into Moldavia and Wallachia in order to protect Eastern
Orthodox Christians in the area.  The other warring powers, however,
interpreted this maneuver as an aggressive invasion of a certain
empire, using the skills of such medical luminaries as Mary Seacole
and Florence Nightingale to  revolutionize the role of the military
nurse on the battlefield. For ten points, name this war notable for
the stupidity of its commanders, pitting Great Britain, France,
Austria, and the Ottoman Empire against Imperial Russia. Wuthering
Heights  1 The protagonist of this novel, as a youth, is forced into
slave labor by his foster brother and sworn enemy. The protagonist
later falls in love with the sister of that character, Hindley, though
the sister, in order to protect the protagonist from Hindley and gain
favor with the noble family that lives on Thrushcross Grange, goes on
to marry Edgar Linton. That sister, Catherine Earnshaw, later affirms
that she has fallen in love with the Byronic hero Heathcliff in, FTP,
what stormy Gothic novel written by Emily Bronte taking place in the
titular estate? chirality 1,3-dichloroallene exhibits the axial
version of these property, and (E)-cyclooctene has the planar variety.
Walden inversion, which involves this property of a molecule, can
occur in reactions with an SN2  mechanism. First discovered in
tartaric acid, this property is not exhibited by meso compounds, and
it can be tested by a polarimeter. It occurs in tetrahedral molecules
in which all four substituents are different.  Describing molecules
that are non-superimposable on their mirror images, it results in
enantiomers. FTP, identify this concept in chemistry often
conceptualized as "handedness." How I Met Your Mother One character on
this show considers wearing a Native American headdress to his wedding
after shaving off a strip of his hair. In another episode, it is
revealed that the protagonist's girlfriend was once a Canadian pop
singer with hits like "Let's go to the Mall" and "Sandcastles in the
Sand." After criticizing a building shaped like a penis, the
protagonist is put in charge of designing his first building in New
York, but later quits his job and is forced to design a Rib Restaurant
shaped like a cowboy hat. FTP, Bob Saget narrates the titular story to
his children in which CBS comedy, featuring Ted Mosby and his
womanizing  "bro" Barney Stinson, played by Neil Patrick Harris? Pablo
Neruda One collection of poems by this author ends with the lines “It
is the hour of departure. Oh abandoned one.” and contains such poems
as “Ah Vastness of Pines” and “Tonight I Can Write”. This author wrote
poems to an artichoke, conger chowder, and a large tuna in the market
in his collection Elementary Odes.  In another poem by this author,
the speaker says “rise and be born with me, my brother” while
ascending to the titular Incan structure. FTP, “The Heights of Macchu
Picchu” is part of the collection, Canto General, by what Chilean poet
who wrote Twenty Love Poems and A Song of Despair? Erik Ericson While
treaching at a private school in Vienna, this man became acquainted
with Anna Freud, after which he decided to study the Montessori method
of education. In contrast to an earlier work, his 1969  book Ghandi’s
Truth focused on the later stages of the life cycle. This author of
Young Man Luther broke with Freud and expanded upon his five stages of
development with eight of his own, including Autonomy vs. doubt and
Industry vs. inferiority. FTP, Identify this psychologist, the author
of Childhood and Society. Italy One author from this country wrote a
play in which an inspector is constantly outwitted by The Maniac, whom
he is trying to interrogate, Accidental Death of an Anarchist.
Another author from this nation wrote a novel detailing a conversation
between Marco Polo and Kublai Khan, describing the title entities,
Invisible Cities. While this country’s most famous playwright wrote
one play in which a character is convinced that he’s Emperor Henry IV,
and one in which a family barges into a rehearsal of a play to demand
that the Manager help them finish their story, Six Characters in
Search of an Author. FTP, Dario Fo, Italo Calvino, and Luigi
Pirandello all hail from what nation? Sargon (or Sharru-ken) the Great
of Akkad The son of a gardener, this man started out as a royal
cupbearer, but soon rose to tremendous imperial prominence and took a
name meaning “true king”. After becoming king of his home city of
Kish, he campaigned against Lugalzagezi of Uruk. This ruler's
grandson, who was called a god-king and was  named Naram-Sin, was the
last great ruler of the polity this man founded, which collapsed
suddenly after an extended drought stopped shipments of grain to Sumer
from northern Mesopotamia. FTP, name this man who founded arguably the
world's first empire, with its capital at Akkad. Tezcatlipoca He was
responsible for kidnapping Xochiquetzal from her previous husband,
Tlaloc, who later married Chalchiuhtlicue. He also captured the
monster Cipactli by using his own foot as bait, and created the earth
from her body. For this reason, he is depicted with only one foot, and
his face is usually shown to be covered in black and yellow stripes.
His animal counterpart is the jaguar, and when he takes its shape, he
is known as Tepeyollotl. Embodying change through conflict, this deity
was often considered a tempter of humans. As a god of nighttime and
the north, he was a constant opponent of Quetzalcoatl, against whom he
battled for control of the world. For ten points name this Aztec god
associated with royalty, known as the smoking mirror. Alzheimer’s
disease Many sufferers of this disease have alpha-synuclein-containing
Lewy neurites in the CA2-3 region, and all have APP that has been
fragmented via proteolysis. It can only be definitively diagnosed via
treatment of tissue samples with Congo Red or Bielschowsky staining
for a specific peptide derived from APP. Those that have the E4 allele
of apolipoprotein E are at an increased risk for this condition, which
causes the breakdown of microtubules in the brain due to tau protein
aggregation. FTP, name the incurable  neurodegenerative disease that
affects the hippocampus and results in dementia, a condition which is
characterized by the formation of beta-amyloid plaques and tangles.
Nighthawks The artist of this painting began it immediately following
the attack on Pearl Harbor, and the gloom of the country is visible in
this painting. The store Phillies is the only source of light in this
painting, wherein an old man with two cones of white hair stands in
front of two silver containers and he bends down at a counter as if
fetching drinks for the three patrons of the diner, two somber men in
dark suits and an unsmiling woman in a red dress. Depicting the corner
of a city block across the street from a darkened empty glass
storefront, FTP name this 1942 painting depicting a diner by Edward
Hopper. Second Battle of El Alamein This battle began with Operation
Lightfoot, so named because of the initial infantry assault designed
not to set off the 500,000 mines placed by the enemy and allow for
minesweepers to remove them,  allowing the tanks that were the major
player in this conflict to advance. This battle ended with Operation
Supercharge, which featured heavy attrition termed "the Hammering of
the Panzers." The Allies sank the tanker Proserpina during this
battle, leaving the enemy tanks with little fuel. Rommel hoped that a
victory at Stalingrad would force the British to pull back their tanks
into Persia, allowing for a victory at this conflict that would allow
the Germans to push across the Suez and the Caucasus into the oil-rich
Middle East. But as at Stalingrad the Axis lost this battle, which was
a turning point in the war: Churchill remarked that before this
battle, the Allies never had any victories; after this battle, they
never had any defeats. FTP, name this victory for the Allies under
Montgomery, a 1942 battle in the Egyptian desert. nebulae These
structures are the basic building blocks of the universe as they
contain the elements which form stars and solar systems. These are
some of the largest objects in our galaxy, measuring hundreds of
light-years across. The emission and reflection types are bright but
lack a noticeable shape while the planetary kind, named for their
brightness and round shape, are produced by stars ejecting their outer
layers of gas.  Neutron stars and pulsars lie at the center of the
supernova remnant type. FTP, what is this interstellar cloud of dust,
hydrogen gas, helium gas, and plasma which include the Eagle, Crab,
and Hourglass ones. August Strindberg A trilogy of plays by this
author details the spiritual conversion of a write called The Stranger
who eventually becomes a monk, The Road to Damascus. Another character
created by this author, Agnes, is secretly a daughter of Indra placed
on earth to witness the problems of humanity in his A Dream Play. And
his so-called “chamber plays” include The Burned Site and The Ghost
Sonata. FTP, the titular character has relations with the manservant
and Jean, who kills her pet bird at the end of Miss Julie, a play by
what Swedish dramatist? hardness This property can be tested in resins
and other composite materials with the Barcol test. It increases as
particle size decreases, a relationship known as the Hall-Petch
relationship. Cubic boron nitride, often known by the brand name of
Borazon, has one of the highest known values for this property. It can
be tested in metal via the Leeb test, and scales for measuring it
include the Brinell scale and the Rockwell scale. The Vickers pyramid
number is another unit for this property of a material, and apatite
has a moderate value for this property according to the most common
scale for measuring it. Sometimes defined in terms of the ability to
scratch other substances, FTP identify this property measured by the
Mohs scale. {Atticus} {Finch} (accept either or both names) This man
is talented at playing the Jew's harp, and he disappoints his son by
refusing to play in a church football game. This man employs Calpurnia
to raise his children. He demonstrates his famous accuracy at shooting
when he guns down a (*) rabid dog. He shows the left-handedness of Bob
Ewell, and his children are attacked on their way home from a
Halloween pageant. Those children are saved from that attack by Boo
Radley, who lives across from this defender of Tom Robinson and father
of Jem and Scout in Maycomb, Alabama. For 10 points, name this
righteous lawyer protagonist of Harper Lee's To Kill A Mockingbird.
{genocide} [prompt on "Holocaust" during the pre-"for 10 points" line;
prompt on "mass murder;" prompt on "mass killing;" prompt on "mass
extermination"] The first one of these events in modern history began
after Lothar von Trotha defeated forces led by Samuel Maherero. Orhan
Pamuk was prosecuted for talking about one of these events under
Article 301 of the Turkish penal code. Another of these events began
after the assassination of Juvenal Habyarimana and led to many Tutsis
fleeing from a Hutu-led (*) Rwanda. Another of these events saw the
use of Zyklon B, was largely led by Heinrich Himmler, and was termed
"the final solution." For 10 points, name these systematic attempt to
eradicate most or all of a given race or people, such as the Holocaust
and the one in Darfur. {game theory} One value from this field was
named after Lloyd Shapley. This field was used in conjunction with
biology by John Maynard Smith to develop the concept of the ESS. The
"stag hunt" is one problem from this field, while the minimax theorem
from this field was developed by one of its founders, John (*) von
Neumann. In one problem from this field, a Nash equilibrium is reached
when all involved decide to defect. A Mexican standoff and zero-sum
are examples of the title situation from this field. The prisoner's
dilemna is a situation from, for 10 points, what field in which
strategies may be undertaken by players? {potential energy} (prompt on
uppercase "P" or uppercase "V"; prompt on "energy"; do not accept or
prompt on "kinetic energy") When this quantity is constant, the
solutions to the time-independent Schrodinger equation are complex
exponentials, and the shape of the graph of this quantity is square
for an infinite square well. In the Hamiltonian or Lagrangian, it is
often denoted uppercase V. Negative the gradient, or spatial
derivative, of this property is equal to force, and it is equal to
one-half a constant times the (*) displacement squared for a spring.
The chemical form of this property is contained in bonds, and its
gravitational form is proportional to the weight times the height. A
swing at its peak has the maximum value of, for 10 points, what type
of energy contrasted with kinetic? {Madame Bovary} The author of this
work remarked on one character in it "she is me!" A letter arrives at
the bottom of a basket of apricots in this novel, while one character
in it meets another at a performance of Lucia di Lammermoor. One
character initially marries Heloise Dubuc and an operation on
Hippolyte's (*) clubfoot is botched in this book. Monsieur Lheureux
loans the title character large amounts of money as that character
conducts an affair under the pretense of piano lessons in this novel.
Earlier, that character in this novel had had an affair with Rodolphe,
and later Leon. Charles's wife Emma titles, for 10 points, what book
by Gustave Flaubert? Peter Ilyich {Tchaikovsky} (or Pyotr Ilyich
{Tchaikovsky}) This composer's 4th symphony contains the folk tune "In
the Field Stood a Birch Tree." Nikolai Rubinstein initially criticized
this man's Piano Concerto No. 1, though Rubinstein later reconsidered.
One of this composer's works opens with a bassoon solo marked with 6
p's. This composer of the "Overture- Fantasy" Romeo and Juliet used a
(*) 5/4 movement in his 6th symphony, which was termed Pathetique. One
of this composer's works uses excerpts from "La Marseillaise" ["mar-
seh-yez"] and "God Save the Tsar," as well as cannon shots. For 10
points, name this Russian composer of the 1812 Overture. {magnesium}
(accept {Mg} before mention) This element is oxidized in the titanium-
producing Kroll process. Reagents containing this element participate
in reactions which transform nitriles into ketones and aldehydes or
ketones into alcohols; these are (*) Grignard reagents. It can be used
to remove sulfur from steel, and when used in benchtop reactions, this
element is usually in the form of a ribbon. When this element is
burned, a bright white flare is produced. Located in the porphyrin
ring of chlorophyll, this element has a hydroxide whose aqueous
solution is commonly known as a "milk," as well as a sulfate known as
Epsom salt. For 10 points, identity this alkaline earth metal with
atomic number 12 and chemical symbol Mg. Oliver {Brown} et al. v.
{Board} of Education of Topeka et al. [accept {Brown}; accept names in
either order] A case combined into this court case involved a field
trip to the John Philip Sousa Junior High School and was titled
Bolling v. Melvin Sharpe. A book cited in this case was Gunnar
Myrdal's An American Dilemna. A revisiting of this case ordered that
an action be performed with "all deliberate speed." An experiment
cited in this case was performed by the Clarks and tested children's
preferences of different types of (*) dolls. This Warren Court case
was argued by Thurgood Marshall and overruled the "separate, but
equal" doctrine of Plessy v. Fergusson. For 10 points, name this court
case that mandated the desegregation of schools. The {School of
Athens} (or {Scuola di Atene}) This work contains two barrel vaults
with hexagonal coffers, and the artist appears in it staring directly
at the viewer. This painting located across from the La Disputa
contains statues of Apollo and Athena flanking the central figures.
Unknown figures in this painting may be Bramante and (*) Hypatia. Two
men in this painting hold globes, while another man writes on a slab
of stone and rests his head on his hand. Another figure in this work
lies on some stairs with his leg splayed; that man is Diogenes, who
appears with people like Pythagoras and Zeno. For 10 points, the
philosophers Aristotle and Plato appear in what fresco painted by
Raphael? {Pakistan} The Sulaiman Mountains extend into the
northwestern part of this country. The strategic Bolan Pass through
the Toba Kakar Range connects the cities of Jacobabad and Quetta in
this country. Rawalpindi, located just south of this nation's capital,
is the home of this nation's military headquarters. (*) South
Waziristan is part of the FATA [Fah-Tah] in this nation that also has
divisions named Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, named after a well known mountain
pass, and Punjab. This nation's Sindh province, with capital Karachi,
is home to the Indus River delta. For 10 points, name this western
neighbor of India with capital Islamabad. {Spider-Man} (accept
epithets like "Spectacular," "Amazing," "Incredible," "Ultimate"\--you
get the idea; prompt on "Peter Parker" before it is read) In a
ridiculous storyline, Miles Warren creates a clone of this superhero
that disguises himself as Ben Reilly. After this hero causes the death
of one of his loves from whiplash after she is thrown from a bridge,
he indirectly causes a supervillain who uses Pumpkin Bombs to impale
himself on his own (*) glider. This superhero's enemies include Norman
Osborn, as well as an alien symbiote which merges with Eddie Brock to
form Venom. This superhero's alter- ego works for J. Jonah Jameson as
a photographer and is in love with people like Mary Jane and Gwen
Stacey. Peter Parker is the alter-ego of, for 10 points, what
superhero with arachnid powers? Battle of {Waterloo} During this
battle the Earl of Uxbridge's leg was hit by grape-shot. A tactic
involving forces situated on the opposite side of a hill that was
named the reverse slope defence was used in this battle. Fighting
occurred near the village of Mont-Saint-Jean in this battle that was
preceded by victories at Ligny and Quatre Bras for one side. (*)
Prussian troops under Gerhard von Blucher [BLUE-ker] aided the Seventh
Coalition in winning this battle, after which Louis XVIII was restored
to the throne and the losing commander was exiled to Saint Helena. For
10 points, name this victory for the Duke of Wellington over Napoleon
Bonaparte. {snake} [accept {serpent}; accept {dragon}; accept specific
species] In Chinese mythology, the lower half of the goddess Nuwa was
this type of creature. The blood of one of these creatures enabled
Sigurd to understand the speech of birds after he slew Fafnir. Ra's
enemy Apep was of this form, and the Ouroboros is one of these animals
that swallows itself. In Hindu mythology, (*) nagas were this type of
creature that were the enemy of Garuda, which the Aborigines also
worship a Rainbow example of. Apollo slew one of these creatures to
establish the Delphic oracle, and one appears in Norse mythology
encircling the Earth. Jormungandr is the Midgard example of, for 10
points, what type of animal that hisses and slithers? David Herbert
{Lawrence} (or D. H. {Lawrence}) While staying in New Mexico, this
author wrote a novel about the tourist Kate Leslie and the cult-leader
Don Cipriano titledThe Plumed Serpent. One of this man's characters is
torn between his love for Clara Dawes and Miriam Leivers. This creator
of the Brangwen family in Women in Love wrote a novel about Paul (*)
Morel, who struggles to break away from his mother in the novel Sons
and Lovers. He wrote a frequently banned novel in which the title
character experiences sensual love by cheating on her husband Clifford
with the gamekeeper Oliver Mellors. For 10 points, name this British
author of Lady Chatterley's Lover. {mean} or {average} Chisini types
of these values include the quadratic and Heronian ones. For a
continuous distribution function, the population type of these values
is equal to the integral of the product of the function and its
probability function over all possible values. A theorem named after
these values states that for two (*) endpoints of a function, there is
always a tangent along that function parallel to the secant of the
endpoints. The square root of the product of two numbers is its
geometric form, and it is often contrasted with medians and modes. For
10 points, name this statistical measure whose arithmetic type is
equal to the sum of a set of values divided by the number of values.
Eero {Saarinen} One of this architect's buildings is a brick cylinder
with lights streaming down from an aperture in the roof. That chapel
is located at MIT, where he also designed a building modeled after
one-eighth of a sphere titled Kresge Auditorium. This architect who
created the futuristic (*) Tulip Chair used a thin-shell concrete roof
in the design of the roof of the TWA terminal at JFK airport. He
employed a curved concrete roof in his design of Dulles Airport, while
his best known work stands 636 feet tall on the banks of the
Mississippi. For 10 points name this designer of the St. Louis Gateway
Arch, a Finnish architect. {Leviathan} This work uses the term plenum
to refer to the universe and dismisses demonology as erroneous in a
section referring to a "Confederacy of Deceivers;" that section is "Of
the Kingdom of Darkness." A crowned giant symbolizing this work's
title concept appears on its (*) frontispiece, and its second section,
Of Common-wealth, describes the twelve rights of the sovereign and
judges monarchy superior to aristocracy and democracy. This book
describes life in a state of nature as a "war of all against all,"
causing life to be "solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short." For 10
points, name this political treatise named after a Biblical sea
monster written by Thomas Hobbes. The {Rubaiyat} of Omar Khayyam The
speaker of this work describes watching a Potter "thumping his wet
clay." One version of this work opens with a description of "Morning
in the Bowl of the Night" and with the command "Awake!" This work
contains the line "the Moving Finger writes; and, having writ / Moves
on." One translation of this work describes (*) "singing in the
Wilderness" along with "A Book of Verses underneath the Bough / A Jug
of Wine, a Loaf of Bread--and Thou" and was made by Edward Fitzgerald.
It consists of four line poems called quatrains. For 10 points, name
this series of poems by the Persian poet Omar Khayyam. {X} chromosome
One mutation associated with this structure can cause hypohidrotic
ectodermal dysplasia, a condition in which sweat glands do not
properly develop. Another mutation associated with this structure is
the leading genetic cause of mental retardation. This structure can be
Lyonized, or (*) inactivated to form a Barr body, and some individuals
with only one of this chromosome have Turner syndrome. Mutations of
genes on this chromosome can result in color blindness, hemophilia,
and its namesake "fragile" syndrome. For 10 points, name this human
sex chromosome that most females have two of and most males have one
of, which is contrasted with the Y chromosome. Arthur {Miller} One of
this writer's works frequently uses flute music and sees a father
laughs at his son's theft of a football. Rodolpho's marriage to
Catherine causes Eddie Carbone to turn Marco and Rodolpho in to the
Immigration Bureau in his play A View from the Bridge. This man wrote
a play in which Joe Keller's approval of faulty plane parts causes the
death of (*) 21 pilots; that play is All My Sons. Abigail Williams
starts the Salem Witch Trials in an allegory of McCarthyism by this
man, while his most famous work ends with the suicide for insurance
money by Willy Loman. For 10 points, name this author of The Crucible
and Death of a Salesman. {redshift} [accept gravitational {redshift}
on the first line] One type of this phenomenon was measured using a
Fe-57 detector in the Harvard Tower experiment. This effect produces
the first-degree anisotropy in the CMBR. Recombination of hydrogen
atoms occurred at a value of approximately 1100 for the quantity
associated with this effect, whose cosmological variety increases with
age and distance; that is because the universe is (*) expanding
according to Hubble's law. A few objects, such as Andromeda, exhibit
the opposite of this effect, because they are moving towards us. For
10 points, name this phenomenon, in which the wavelength of
astronomical objects receding from Earth broadens, producing a
namesake change in color. {sleep} A namesake Research Center for this
phenomenon was founded by William Dement at Stanford. K-complexes and
namesake spindles occur during one stage of this phenomenon, while
delta waves and the beginning of theta rhythms occur during other
stages of it. A successive lack of this event leads to its namesake
(*) "debt," which can cause can cause a weakened immune system and
memory deterioration. An obstruction of breathing during this event is
its namesake apnea, and during one stage of it, the eyes begin to move
rapidly. REM is a stage of, for 10 points, what state of semi-
consciousness in which humans dream? Jean-Paul {Sartre} In one of this
writer's stories, Pablo gives what he believes is the false hiding
location of Ramon, who is shot at the title execution spot. He wrote a
play in which the Communist Hugo shoots Hoederer. One novel by this
author of "The Wall" and Dirty Hands sees a critical realization occur
at a chestnut tree. In that novel, Antoine (*) Roquentin researches
the Marquis de Rollebon and develops the title "sweetish sickness",
which he calls a Nausea. His most famous play is set in a room with
Third Empire furniture and sees Garcin announce "Hell is other
people." For 10 points, name this existentialist who wrote No Exit.
Harry S. {Truman} An attempt on this man's life led to the death of
police officer Leslie Coffelt, who managed to kill Griselio Torresola.
That assassination attempt was also perpetrated by Oscar Collazo, who
was a Puerto Rican nationalist. As president, this man vetoed the
Taft-Hartley Act and desegregated the (*) armed forces. This proponent
of a "Fair Deal" recalled Douglas MacArthur during the Korean War.
This man is depicted holding a copy of the Chicago Daily Tribune that
claims that he had lost to Thomas Dewey in the 1948 presidential
election. For 10 points, name this president who ordered the dropping
of an atomic bomb on Hiroshima. State of {Israel} This nation's city
of Arad in the southeastern part of this nation is home to Mount Kina
as well this nation's National Trail. The highest point in this
nation's internationally recognized boundaries is Mount Meron, while
this nation claims that Mount Hermon is its highest point. This
nation's city of (*) Beersheba is known as the "capital of the Negev".
Adjacent to Jordan's sole port, Aqaba, lies the city of Eilat, the
only domestic destination of Ben Gurion Airport located in this
nation's capital city. For 10 points, name this Jewish nation on the
east coast of the Mediterranean Sea. {harmonic oscillator}s (accept
{simple harmonic oscillator}; accept {damped oscillator}; prompt on
"oscillator"; prompt on "spring" or "pendulum") The energy levels of
this model are proportional to n plus one-half in its quantum
analogue. Using a Taylor series quadratic expansion, any stable
equilibrium can be modeled using the general equation for one of these
systems. RLC circuits are an electrical example of these systems, one
case of which sets omega equal to the square root of the length over
gravity; that case uses the (*) "small angle" assumption. For one of
these systems, the square root of k over the mass gives the angular
frequency. Hooke's law can be used to create these systems. A
restoring force creates, for 10 points, what systems which springs
exemplify the "simple" type of? Las {Meninas} This painting is
analyzed in the opening of the book The Order of Things by Michel
Foucault. Scenes painted by Rubens hang on the back wall in this
painting as a bodyguard and a nun converse to the right. A man can be
seen through a doorway at the back of this painting, while a man
wearing a red cross and working at an (*) easel is this work's artist
himself. A mastiff in this work's foreground is being nudged by the
foot of a dwarf as a small girl in a large white dress stands at its
center. For 10 points, name this painting showing the Infanta
Margarita and the family of Phillip IV of Spain, a work by Diego
Velazquez. {Fungi} Coenocytic members of this kingdom lack septa, and
another group in this kingdom, the ascomycetes, reproduces asexually
using conidia. A unicellular member of this kingdom mates using
"alpha" and "a" mating factors. Other members of this kingdom can form
(*) mycorrhizae with plants, and lichens are a symbiotic relationship
between photosynthetic microbes and members of this kingdom. Notable
members of this kingdom include Neurospora crassa and Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, and most members of this kingdom have chitin in their cell
walls. For 10 points, name this kingdom that includes yeast, bread
mold, and mushrooms. {Beloved} One character in this book works toward
entering Oberlin College by studying under Miss Bodwin. Another
character in this novel calls his heart a tobacco tin and fears a
beautiful woman who walks fully dressed out of a stream. Characters in
this novel include a man referenced as (*) "schoolteacher" who worked
at Sweet Home and a granddaughter of Baby Suggs named Denver. Paul D
abandons Sethe in this novel after learning about the mercy killing
she performed on her daughter when faced with being returned to
slavery. 124 Bluestone Road is visited by the title spirit in, for 10
points, what novel by Toni Morrison? {9/11} Key members of this event
had organized in Hamburg, Germany. After this event, Tom Ridge became
the head of a newly consolidated office that consolidated part of the
INS and the Federal Protective Service. One location in this event had
been the site of an earlier truck (*) bombing in a parking lot.
Photographs taken during this event include "The Falling Man" and one
of a president in the midst of reading to schoolchildren. The
Department of Homeland Security was created and the PATRIOT Act was
passed in response to this event. For 10 points, hijacked planes were
used to carry out what terrorist attack? the {Qur'an} (or {Koran})
This book describes a rope of palm-fibre wrapping around a woman's
neck in an invective against her husband nicknamed "the Flame." Mary
is mentioned 34 times within this book, including a section titled
after her. A verse describing how God's throne extends over all the
universe appears in this book's longest section (*) "The Cow." One
figure in this book is magically taken to Jerusalem during the Night
Journey, and it contains 114 approximate chapters called suras.
Hadiths are not found in this text, but were spoken by the same
prophet who "recited" this text. For 10 points, the Archangel Gabriel
revealed to Muhammed what holy book of Islam? {Genghis} Khan [accept
{Zingis} Khan; accept {Chengiz} Khan; accept {Chinggis} Khan; accept
{Yuan Taizu}; accept {Cheng Ji Si Han}; {Dschingis} Khan; accept
{Jenghiz} Khan;accept {Jinghis} Khan; accept {Temujin} before
mentioned] According to legend, this man's funeral escort killed all
who crossed their path to keep this man's grave secret. This ruler
killed his half-brother Bekhter because Bekhter would not share his
hunting spoils, and this man's father Yesugai was poisoned by Tatars.
After his ambassador was humiliated by Otrar's governor, this leader
crushed the (*) Khwarezmian Empire. This man defeated his once friend
Jamukha. This leader conquered the Jin and Western Xia empires, and he
may have poisoned his son Jochi to make way for his more able son
Ogedai. For 10 points, name this warchief also known as Temujin who
united the Mongol tribes. {Arabic} (accept word forms; prompt on
"Egyptian" Arabic) A writer in this language used the legend of the
Seven Sleepers in his play The People of the Cave. Another author in
this language described a friend of the cafe owner Tarzan who seeks
revenge on his wife and friend in The Thief and the Dogs. That author
used this language to write the books Sugar Street and (*) Palace
Walk, which are in a trilogy titled after a capital. A roc's nest is
visited by Sinbad the Sailor in a work in this language narrated by
Scheherazade. Naguib Mahfouz wrote the Cairo Trilogy using, for 10
points, what language of the short story collection One Thousand and
One Nights? {Donatello} (or Donato di Niccolo di Betto {Bardi}) This
artist included depictions of the three Virtues in his design for the
tomb of Antipope John XIII. He supposedly yelled "Speak!" at a bald
statue he made of Habakkuk, which was nicknamed Zuccone and is located
outside the Orsanmichelle. An unusually haggard wooden depiction of
the title woman comprises this artist's Magdalene Penitent. This man
sculpted an (*) equestrian statue of Erasmo da Narni, who was
nicknamed the Honeyed Cat, or Gattamelata, while his best known work
shows the title figure holding the sword of Goliath. For 10 points,
name this Renaissance sculptor, whose version of the David is bronze.
Pope {Francis} I (or Jorge Mario {Bergoglio}; prompt on "the Pope"
before end) Apocryphally, this man declared "the carnival is over!"
after being elected to his current position, upon which he also
refused to wear a mozzetta. In private remarks made in June, this man
seemed to acknowledge a "stream of corruption" and a "gay lobby," and
later while on a plane flight back from Brazil, this man offhandedly
said "who am I to (*) judge?" This man has been noted for his
humility. He succeeded a man who became the first to resign a position
in 600 years and is the first Jesuit to hold that position. For 10
points, name this Argentinian cardinal who succeeded Benedict XVI as
Pope. Pancho {Villa} (or Francisco {Villa}; or Jose Doroteo Arango
{Arambula}) This man was assassinated after going into town without
his bodyguards called the "Dorados," upon which he apocryphally said
"Don't let it end like this. Tell them I said something." Alvaro
Obregon was victorious at the Battle of Celaya over this man's
Division of the North. This man served as Governor of (*) Chihuahua
for two years, and along with Emiliano Zapata, this man opposed
Venustiano Carranza. While accompanying this man's army, Ambrose
Bierce disappeared. After this man led the raid of Columbus, an
expedition was led by General "Black Jack" Pershing to capture him.
For 10 points, name this Mexican revolutionary and bandit. {Thoth}
Along with Shu, this figure was sent to bring Tefnut back from Nubia
after she fled there in the form of a lioness, leaving Egypt without
water. A gambling match between this figure and Khonsu resulted in the
births of Nut's children and the creation of the (*) lunar calendar.
The inventor of magic, this deity assisted Isis in resurrecting her
husband. When dead souls pass into the underworld this god weighs
their hearts against a feather to judge whether they are worthy enough
to pass into the afterlife. Commonly represented with the head of an
ibis or a baboon, this is, for 10 points, what Egyptian god of writing
and wisdom? {Great Expectations} One character in this book drives his
accomplice Arthur into madness and convinces his fiancee to buy a
brewery; that character is Compeyson. This novel sees one character
write the letter T on a slate after she is attacked with a hammer by
Orlick, who works under the blacksmith (*) Joe Gargery. This novel
contains a woman who urges her adopted daughter to break the heart of
the protagonist, as well as the lawyer Jaggers. This novel opens with
the protagonist aiding an escaped convict, who turns out to be his
benefactor Abel Magwitch. For 10 points, name this novel about Pip
written by Charles Dickens. {Madame Butterfly} [accept {Madama
Butterfly}] At the end of Act 1 of this opera, one character sings
Vogliatemi bene or "Love me, please" as part of a long love duet. A
child is named Sorrow in this opera in which the Bonze renounces his
niece for changing religions. One character in this opera wonders when
the robin makes his nest and sings (*) Un bel di or "One Beautiful
Day." Goro prepares the marriage of the title character and tries to
convince the male lead to be faithful. That male lead of this opera is
the American Naval officer Pinkerton. Cio-Cio ["chocho"] San commits
suicide at the end of, for 10 points, what opera by Giacomo Puccini
about the title Japanese woman? {lone} electron {pairs} (accept
{unbonded} electron {pairs} before end of question; before end of
question, prompt on "electrons" or "electron pairs") The formation of
one of these entities in an organic reaction mechanism is indicated by
a double-barbed "curly" arrow pointing from a bond to an atom. Twice
the number of these is subtracted from the number of valence electrons
in the calculation of formal charge. Coordinate covalent bonds are
formed from the (*) sharing of these entities. Their number is given
by the E value in AXE theory. VSEPR [ves-per] theory gives the
geometry of both bonds and these around a central atom. The two of
these possessed by the oxygen atom in water give the molecule a bent
geometry. Two dots represent, for 10 points, what pairs of unbonded
electrons? 22\. During one conflict in this nation, Angelina Eberly
fired upon Thomas Smith with a howitzer as he attempted to remove
papers from one building. That conflict is known as this nation's
Archive War, and began in response to one The formation of one of
these entities in an organic reaction mechanism is indicated by a
double-barbed "curly" arrow pointing from a bond to an atom. Twice the
number of these is subtracted from the number of valence electrons in
the calculation of formal charge. Coordinate covalent bonds are formed
from the (*) sharing of these entities. Their number is given by the E
value in AXE theory. VSEPR [ves-per] theory gives the geometry of both
bonds and these around a central atom. The two of these possessed by
the oxygen atom in water give the molecule a bent geometry. Two dots
represent, for 10 points, what pairs of unbonded electrons? Charlie
{Chaplin} One of this director's movies ends with a blind flower girl
regaining her sight and recognizing her benefactor. This director of
City Lights played a role in which he plays with an inflatable globe
and delivers a speech criticizing "machine men" while disguised as a
character parodying (*) Hitler. He attempts to eat a boot in another
of his movies, while another of his roles has him pulled between the
gears of a factory machine. This actor in The Great Dictator, The Gold
Rush, and Modern Times frequently plays a poor character with tattered
clothes. For 10 points, name this actor of the silent era who often
portrayed a Tramp. Langston {Hughes} This man declared "Let the rain
kiss you" in the opening to his poem "April Rain Song." The speaker of
one of this writer's poems is told to "Go home and write / a page
tonight" in "Theme for English B," while another of his poems takes
place "down on Lennox Avenue," where a (*) "drowsy syncopated tune" is
the title "Weary Blues." Lorraine Hansberry took the title of her play
A Raisin in the Sun from this man's poem about a "dream deferred." For
10 points, name this poet who says "my soul has grown deep like" the
title objects in "The Negro Speaks of Rivers," a member of the Harlem
Renaissance. {Catherine the Great} [accept {Catherine II} or
{Yekaterina Alexeevna}; prompt on "Catherine"] The transfer of Yedisan
to this ruler and the recognition of this ruler's annexation of the
Crimean Khanate formed part of the Treaty of Jassy. This monarch
attempted to form a "Northern Accord" against the Hapsburgs and
Bourbons with the aid of Panin. The Confederation of the Bar formed
after this ruler installed Stanislaw (*) Poniatowski on the Polish
throne. This ruler came to power after assassinating Peter III.
Advisers to this monarch included Grigory Orlov and a man famous for
his fake villages, Grigory Potemkin, both of whom were possible lovers
of this woman. For 10 points, name this Russian empress who ruled
during the Golden Age of Russia. {cholesterol} [accept {LDL} until HDL
is mentioned] PCSK9 targets molecules of this for destruction, and
Goldstein and Brown identified a Mendelian disorder in which
individual died as a result of high levels of this. Bile acid binders
can be used to treat that disease, as this compound is a precursor of
bile acid. HMG-CoA reductase interrupts the key committed step in the
formation of this compound from (*) acetate. This compound is a
structural component of cell membranes and a precursor to vitamin D.
HDL is known as the "good" type of this, while LDL is known to cause
heart disease. Dietary sources of this compound include egg yolks and
beef. For 10 points, identify this compound, a member of the steroid
family. {Parks and Recreation} During one episode of this show a
character is served scotch in the form of hand lotion, a method he
describes as "the wrong way to consume alcohol". Under the alias of
FBI agent Burt Macklin, one character on this show attempts to
recreate an assault by repeatedly smashing pies into Jerry's face.
Guest stars on this show have included John McCain and (*) Joe Biden.
Nick Offerman plays the manly mustache-wearing Ron Swanson on this
show. For 10 points, Amy Poehler stars on what NBC comedy about the
lives of the employees of the title government agency in the town of
Pawnee, Indiana? Winston Leonard Spencer {Churchill} This leader
became President of the Budget League after helping to pass the
People's Budget while President of the Board of Trade. He won a Nobel
Prize in Literature in part for his A History of the English-Speaking
Peoples, and as First Lord of the Admiralty, he planned the disastrous
Gallipoli Campaign. This man declared that (*) "never in the field of
conflict was so much owed by so many to so few" in praising the RAF,
while in another of his speeches he promised "we shall fight on the
beaches" to rally his country against possible invasion by Germany.
For 10 points, name this man who served as Prime Minister of Britain
during World War II. {Pygmalion} (do not accept or prompt on "My Fair
Lady") An epilogue to this play discusses how Clara begins reading the
novels of H.G. Wells. One character in this play angrily throws a pair
of slippers at another, and that character's father is jokingly
recommended as a moralist to a millionaire. This play begins with a
man identifying people's origins in Covent Garden, where (*) Freddy
Hill appears as well. Colonel Pickering makes a bet with a phonetics
professor in this play that he can correct a flower girl's Cockney
accent and pass her off as a duchess. For 10 points, name this play in
which Professor Henry Higgins gives Eliza Doolittle elocution lessons,
a work by George Bernard Shaw. Antonio {Vivaldi} (accept il {Prete
Rosso} or the {Red Priest} before mention) This composer's Opus No. 3
is a set of concerti titled L'estro Armonico, or Harmonic Inspiration.
The number 644 in the Ryom-Verzeichnis catalog was given to an
oratorio this man composed depicting the beheading of Holofernes
titled Juditha triumphans. He included sections titled "Pleasure" and
(*) "the Hunt," as well as the instructions "the drunkards have fallen
asleep" and "the barking dog" in a set of twelve violin concerti
called The Contest Between Harmony and Invention, which includes a
subset of pieces depicting icy winds in the Winter movement. For 10
points, name this Italian nicknamed "the Red Priest" who composed the
Four Seasons. {voting} (accept word forms; accept "electing" along
with word forms and any specific office before "elect" is read) When
performing this action fails the independence of clones criterion, the
spoiler effect may occur. The Borda count is a method of performing
this action. Non-dictatorship and Pareto efficiency are among three
criteria that cannot all be met in any method for performing this
action according to an (*) impossibility theorem named after Kenneth
Arrow. Condorcet names a method for performing it, and an unfair
advantage in the process of this action can be given by
gerrymandering. After using the plurality method for this action, an
instant runoff may be necessary. For 10 points, name this method by
which people may elect officeholders from among candidates.
{integration} (accept {integral} or word forms) This operation can be
carried out on well-behaved functions of multiple variables in any
order by Fubini's theorem, and the value of this operation around a
closed curve can be related to the value of it over the interior by
Green's theorem. Doing it (*) "by parts" and with u-substitution are
strategies of performing this operation. The "disk" or "shell" types
of this operation can be used to find the volumes of solids of
revolution. This operation can be defined using Riemann sums and
interpreted as the area under a curve. For 10 points, name this
operation which, according to the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, is
the opposite of differentiation. {magnetic field} (or {B-field}; do
not accept or prompt on simply "magnetism") This entity is equal to
the curl of the vector potential. The divergence of this entity is
zero, while the enclosed current is proportional to a closed loop
around this entity according to Ampere's Law, which can be used to
show that its strength is increased inside the loops of solenoids.
This entity has units of either (*) gausses or teslas, and is denoted
capital B. Rotating examples of these form alternating current, while
their formation from electric currents drive generators. Iron fillings
can be used to show, for 10 points, the lines denoting what entity
associated with north and south poles? {Lolita} One character in this
book accompanies an arctic expedition as a psychologist, and had early
married a Polish doctor's daughter named Valeria. Another character in
this novel attends the Beardsley School for Girls, where a motif that
had earlier been the name of a hotel reappears as the title of a play;
that play is The (*) Enchanted Hunters. The protagonist of this novel
is a French immigrant who has been jailed for killing the playwright
Clare Quilty, who eloped with the title character of this novel; that
character's real name is Dolores Haze. For 10 points, name this novel
about Humbert Humbert's obsession with "nymphets", a work by Valdmir
Nabokov. {Second Boer War} [or "Anglo-Boer" in place of "Boer"; prompt
on "Boer Wars"; do not accept "First Boer War"] Because of this war,
Lord Salisbury won the first "Khaki" election, which was named for the
recently issued uniforms used by one side. The Battle of Colenso was
part of the Black Week in this conflict in which Robert Baden Powell
helped lift the Siege of Mafeking. Controversial concentration camp
and (*) scorched earth policies were used in this war by Lord
Kitchener to combat guerrillas led by people such as Louis Botha and
Paul Kruger. The Treaty of Vereeniging ended this conflict which
involved the Orange Free State and the Transvaal. For 10 points, name
this second of two conflicts involving Britain and Dutch-descended
farmers in what is now South Africa. {Dionysus} (accept {Bacchus}
before mentioned) One account of this deity's birth refers to him by
the name Zagreus and describes his body being torn to shreds by the
Titans. This god convinced Hephaestus to ascend to Mt. Olympus, and he
himself replaced Hestia among the Twelve Olympians. In exchange for
helping his satyr friend Silenus, this god awarded (*) Midas a single
wish. After she was left behind on Naxos by Theseus, this god rescued
Ariadne. Zeus saved this god by sewing him into his thigh after his
mother Semele was burnt to ashes by seeing Zeus in his full glory. His
frenzied female followers are known as Maenads. Also known as Bacchus,
for 10 points, name this Greek god of wine. Miguel de {Cervantes}
Saavedra In a work by this writer, a ship of verse takes a group of
poets to the kingdom of Apollo. This author of The Journey to
Parnassus included stories like "The Jealous Extremaduran" and "The
Lawyer of Glass" in his Exemplary Novels. His most famous character
believes a barber's washbin is the Golden Helmet of Mambrino, and is
defeated by Sampson (*) Carrasco, who is disguised as the Knight of
the White Moon. That character rides the horse Rocinante, convinces
the peasant Sancho Panza to join his quest, and attacks giants that
turn out to be windmills. For 10 points, name this Spaniard who
created Don Quixote. Peter Paul {Rubens} This artist drew a sketch of
his first wife Isabella Brant, who appears with him in his painting
The Honeysuckle Bower. In 2001, a painting by this man was
rediscovered in which Herod orders the death of all male children.
This artist of The Massacre of the Innocents included The Coronation
in Saint- Denis and The Disembarkation at Marseilles in his (*) Marie
de' Medici cycle, while another of his works is a triptych in the
Cathedral of Our Lady, Antwerp in which a shroud is used to lower
Jesus after the Crucifixion. The Descent from the Cross is a work by,
for 10 points, what Flemish artist who frequently painted fleshy
nudes? {Sicily} This region wholly contains the Simeto River. The
namesake of this region's most expansive plain is the city of Catania,
which is the tenth largest city in its nation, just behind Bari. Off
the northern coast of this island lies Lipari, which is part of the
archipelago of the Aeolian Islands, which also includes Vulcano and
(*) Stromboli. This large island is broken up into nine provinces
including Ragusa. A proposed suspension bridge would link this massive
island to Calabria across the Strait of Messina. Syracuse is located
in, for 10 points, what largest island in the Mediterranean, located
just southwest of Italy's boot? Immanuel {Kant} This thinker's
comparison of pure concepts to those formed empirically through the
categories of "schema" was criticized by Arthur Schopenhauer. He
answered the title question as "Man's emergence from his self-incurred
immaturity" in the essay "What is Enlightenment?", and claimed to have
been awakened by David Hume from his (*) "dogmatic slumber." This
philosopher identified a moral maxim in which one acts only when
wishing something to be "universal law." This man analyzed synthetic a
priori truths and formulated the concept of the categorical
imperative. For 10 points, name this German philosopher who wrote the
Critique of Pure Reason. Luigi {Pirandello} In one of this man's
novels, a man fakes his death to escape to Monte Carlo before faking
his death again; that book is The Late Mattia Pascal. A play based on
this man's novella Leonora, Addio is produced by Doctor Hinkfuss's
company in this man's play Tonight We Improvise, and a man who fell
off a (*) horse in one of this man's plays believes that he is a Holy
Roman Emperor. This author of Henry IV wrote a play in which Madame
Pace runs a brothel, the Child drowns, and the Boy shoots himself. The
title group asks the Stage Manager for acting roles in, for 10 points,
what writer's play Six Characters in Search of an Author? {prions} The
Doppel protein is homologous to the PrP isoforms of these entities and
a the so-called "laughing sickness" is caused by these entities. A
substitution of asparagine for aspartic acid on the (*) PrNP gene
causes fatal familial insomnia in humans infected by these agents.
Resistant to degradation, these entities were the cause of an epidemic
of kuru among cannibalistic tribes in Papua New Guinea. They are the
causative agents of transmissible spongiform encephalopathies
including Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and scrapie. For 10 points, what
are these infectious proteins that cause fatal neurological disorders
including Mad Cow Disease? {index of refraction} or {refractive index}
(prompt on "n") This value changes upon application of an electric
field in the Kerr effect. Metamaterials have a negative value for this
quantity which gains a complex part to account for absorption in
opaque materials. When this value depends upon the polarity of light,
different values of it can occur in a single material in a property
known as (*) birefringence. The ratio of this quantity for two
different materials is equal to the ratio of the angle of incidence
and its namesake angle according to Snell's Law. For 10 points, name
this ratio of the speed of light in a vacuum to the speed of a light
in a given material. {Haymarket Riot} [accept {Haymarket Massacre};
{Haymarket Square Riot}; or {Haymarket} affair; or similar obvious
knowledge equivalents] Attempts to grant clemency to those convicted
in connection with this event were opposed by Marshall Field. Two
death sentences handed out after this event were commuted by Richard
Oglesby. One man committed suicide using a cigar bomb after being put
on trial for this event, while three other defendants were pardoned by
Governor John Altgeld. Samuel (*) Fielden was the last speaker on the
day of this event at a rally supporting the institution of the 8-hour
workday at the McCormick Harvesting Machine Company plant. For 10
points, name this 1886 Chicago riot which broke out when an unknown
assailant threw a dynamite bomb at the police. {Thor} This figure
asked a dwarf riddles until the sun rose and the dwarf turned to
stone. Grid gave this god iron gloves, which this god used to catch a
molten ingot and slay the giant Geirrod. The cowardly giant Hymir
foiled one of this god's fishing missions. This god journeyed with
Thialfi and Loki to visit (*) Utgard-Loki, who had this god attempt to
drink from the sea, wrestle old age, and lift the paw of a large cat.
This god's chariot is drawn by two goats, and he dressed as Freya to
retrieve his most famous item, which can level mountains. For 10
points, identify this son of Odin who wields Mjollnir and is a god of
thunder. {Committee of Public Safety} [{Comite de salut public};
accept {National Convention} before "hand"] This body was attacked by
the newspaper The Old Cordelier, which criticized it and another body
governing "general security." This body was responsible for carrying
out the Law of the Maximum, which set price limits. This body was
described as "a hand to grasp the weapon of the (*) Revolutionary
Tribunal." The National Convention created this body that was
originally led by Georges Danton before he was ousted by the Jacobins,
and it was disbanded by the Thermidorian Reaction. Maximilien
Robespierre headed, for 10 points, what body that ordered many
executions by guillotine during the Reign of Terror and the French
Revolution? {Psalms} The Eastern Orthodox church divides this book of
the Bible into twenty kathismas, and some sections of this book
contain acrostics, in which each verse begins with a different letter.
One section of this book was written after a man escaped from King
Abimelech by pretending to be insane; that man is credited with
writing half of this book, including one part for his son (*) Solomon.
The most famous part of this book speaks of walking through "the
valley of the shadow of death" and declares that "thy rod and thy
staff they comfort me." For 10 points, name this Biblical book of 150
poems, the 23rd of which is credited to David and declares that "The
Lord is my shepherd." {Antonia} Shimerda [accept {Antonia} Cuzak;
prompt {Shimerda} and {Cuzak} before mention; grudgingly accept My
{Antonia}] This character tells of two Russians who threw a newlywed
couple to a pack of hungry wolves in order to escape. After this
character leaves the service of the Harling family, she works for the
wicked moneylender Wick Cutter, who attempts to molest her. This
character's father plays the (*) violin and commits suicide. This
character is made pregnant and abandoned by Larry Donovan, though she
eventually has a happy marriage with Anton Cuzak after moving back to
Black Hawk, Nebraska. She is friends with Jim Burden. For 10 points,
what Bohemian immigrant and member of the Shimerda family titles a
Willa Cather work? Arab Republic of {Egypt} The murder of domesticated
pigeons in this country by British officers caused the Denshawai
incident. A recently deposed leader of this country was opposed by the
kefaya. In this country, the Wafd Party was deposed in a 1951 coup
that ultimately overthrew King Farouk. Muhammad Naguib led the (*)
Free Officers Movement in this country. A leader of this country
shared the 1978 Nobel Peace Price with Menachem Begin for agreeing to
the Camp David Accords. Great Britain invaded this country in 1956
after it nationalized the Suez Canal. For 10 points, name this North
African country once led by Anwar Sadat, Gamal Abdel Nasser and Hosni
Mubarak. William {Blake} This man asked "Am not I / A fly like thee?"
in the poem "The Fly." He described "dark Satanic mills" in a poem
that begins "And did those feet in ancient time"; that poem prefaces
this man's epic "Milton a Poem." This poet called the title orphan "a
little black thing in the snow" in his poem "The (*) Chimney Sweeper"
while in another poem he repeatedly asks the title animal "Dost thou
know who made thee?" This poet matched his poem "The Lamb" with a poem
in which the title animal is "burning bright / in the forests of the
night." For 10 points, whose collection Songs of Innocence and
Experience contains the poem "The Tyger?" {E}sherichia {coli} Since
1988, Richard Lenski has observed the evolution of this organism in
the laboratory, and members of the genus Shigella are very closely
related to this organism. The MM294 strain of this bacterium is
commonly transformed to be resistant to antibiotics such as ampicillin
and kanamyacin. Notable genes in this bacterium encode (*) lactose
permease and beta-galactosidase, which help break down lactose to
glucose and galactose, and Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase famously
infected this organism with T2 bacteriophages. The lac operon is
present in, for 10 points, what model organism that is found in animal
intestines and can cause food poisoning? {J}ohann {S}ebastian {Bach}
(prompt on {Bach}) This composer wrote a set of sonatas and partitas
for solo violin. The title of nine suites by the Brazilian Heitor
Villa-Lobos references this composer who inspired Charles Gounod's Ave
Maria with the first of a set of pieces in all 24 major and minor
keys. This man wrote an oratorio based on a gospel titled the (*) St
Matthew Passion. This composer supposedly created a set of pieces to
help Count Kaiserling sleep, and a set of his pieces is titled after a
German city. For 10 points, name this Baroque composer of The Well-
Tempered Clavier, the Goldberg Variations, a Mass in B Minor, and the
Brandenburg Concertos. {caliph}ate (accept Rightly Guided {Caliph}s
before "Fatimid" is read) One holder of this title fought the Ridda
wars against rebels charged with having committed apostasy. After the
assassination of one man with this title, Muawiyah I fought against
another holder of this title in the First Fitna. An early holder of
this title was Umar, although one tradition holds the (*) Imams should
have held it instead. The rulers of the Fatimid dynasty held this
title, as did the Rashidun, who included men like Abu Bakr. After the
death of Ali, this title passed on to the rulers of the Umayyad
Dynasty. For 10 points, there were four "Rightly Guided" holders of
what title generally referring to the ruler of the Islamic world?
{Massachusetts} (or {MA}) One politician from this state made his use
of a GMC pickup truck a major part of his first Senate campaign.
Politicians from this state include Mo Cowan and Martha Coakley.
Another politician from this state faced criticism for representing
herself as Native American, and had helped to create the (*) Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau. The first gay man in Congress was from
this state, and names a law with Chris Dodd; that man is Barney Frank.
After earlier winning a special election here, Scott Brown was
defeated in the most expensive Senate race of 2012 in this state. For
10 points, name this home state of Secretary of State John Kerry and
Senator Elizabeth Warren. {Sexual reproduction} (Accept {sex} or clear
equivalents such as {mating}; prompt on {reproduction} or variants
thereof before it is mentioned) Plasmogamy and karyogamy are important
components of this process in fungi. While most animals undergo this
process, bdelloids have evolved to exclusively undergo parthenogenesis
instead. Muller's ratchet and the Red Queen hypothesis explain the
advantages of this process, which is facilitated by (*) pheromones in
animals and involves pollination in plants. This type of reproduction
results in a greater variety of genetic diversity, and it features
fertilization and the production of gametes during meiosis. For 10
points, name this type of reproduction used by humans, which is
contrasted with asexual reproduction. {Aeneid} This work contains a
simile comparing the builders of a city to bees, and one character in
this work is thrown across a river while tied to a spear; that
character is Camilla. This work describes how Sinon convinces the
Greeks to accept the Trojan Horse. This work opens "I sing of arms and
the man" and ends with the death of the (*) Rutulian Turnus, leaving
the way open for the protagonist to become king of Latium; that
protagonist had earlier fled the destruction of Troy and caused Dido
to commit suicide. For 10 points, name this work about the title son
of Anchises and Venus and ancestor of the Romans, an epic written by
Vergil. {mural}s (or {muralism} and word forms; prompt on "painting";
accept {fresco}es) One work of this type shows a skeleton giving birth
and is located in the Baker Library at Dartmouth; that work is the The
Epic of American Civilization. Images of germs and the galaxies form
an X shape in a work of this type which also depicts a hand clutching
an orb. A work of this type depicting a (*) "Controller of the
Universe" was a recreation of one commissioned by Nelson Rockefeller
depicting Vladimir Lenin which was titled Man at the Crossroads. Works
of this type were done by José Orozco and a husband of Frida Kahlo,
the Mexican Diego Rivera. For 10 points, name these paintings done
directly on a ceiling or wall. electrochemical cell {potential}
[accept electrochemical cell {voltage}, accept electrode or reduction
{potential}, accept equivalents like {voltage} of an electrochemical
cell; prompt on E or V; accept "pH" before it is read] Measurements of
this value taken with a setup including calomel can be used to
determine pH, and the Weston cell is the standard for measurement of
this value. It is equal to negative the change in Gibbs free energy
divided by Faraday's constant times "n", and it can be found at non-
standard conditions using the (*) Nernst equation. Values of the same
type for the half-reactions that make up a cell are added to find this
quantity, the value of which is often marked on batteries. For 10
points, identify this measure of the electromotive force output of a
galvanic cell, often denoted E sub cell. Carlos {Fuentes} A rain god
comes to life in one of this man's stories and drowns Filiberto in
this author's short story "The Chac-mool." A fetus born on the 500th
anniversary of Columbus's discovery of America narrates this author's
novel Christopher Unborn, which precedes a novel by this man in which
the schoolteacher (*) Harriet Winslow and General Arroyo appear. A
loveless marriage with Catalina is remembered by the protagonist, a
wealthy tycoon, on his deathbed in this author's most famous work. For
10 points, what Mexican author fictionalized the death of Ambrose
Bierce in The Old Gringo and wrote The Death of Artemio Cruz? Winslow
{Homer} This artist painted the opposing directions two ducks face
after they are shot just taking flight in the work Right and Left. He
based his Prisoners from the Front on his sketches of the Civil War,
while his most famous works were painted while living in Prouts Neck,
Maine. A series of boys joined in a line on the prairie play a game in
this artist's (*) Snap the Whip. He showed a man and four boys sailing
in fair weather in Gloucester in his Breezing Up, while his most
famous painting depicts a black man alone in a stranded boat
surrounded by sharks. For 10 points, name this American artist of The
Gulf Stream. {Colorado} River This river traces its headwaters to the
La Poudre Pass. At Glenwood Canyon, the Hanging Lake flows into this
river, and the canal joining this river and Lake Havasu is spanned by
the 1831 London Bridge. Cities along this river include Moab and Yuma,
where the Gila River flows into this river. The All-American Canal is
used to irrigate the Imperial Valley with waters from this river upon
which (*) Lake Mead was created after the Hoover Dam was built. This
river forms the boundary between Baja California and Sonora before
emptying into the Gulf of California. For 10 points, name this river
on which the Grand Canyon lies. Stanley {Milgram} This man studied the
mental maps of residents of New York and Paris. In one of this
psychologist's breaching experiments, subway riders were asked to give
up their seats and in another study, objects marked for the Friends of
the Nazi Party were mailed with low frequency. This conductor of the
(*) lost letter experiment used a mailing campaign to study the six
degrees of separation in the Small World experiment, while in this
psychologist's most famous experiment, experimenters said "you must go
on" as actors faked pained noises and collapsing. For 10 points, what
Yale psychologist conducted a namesake experiment in which most
participants were willing to administer fatal electric shocks? {Russo-
Japanese} War During this conflict one side's ships fired upon English
fishing boats in the Dogger Bank incident, which nearly caused Great
Britain's entry into this war. General von Kaulbars led the right
flank for one side in this war at the Battle of Mukden. One of the
losing side's fleets in this war was blockaded and captured at (*)
Port Arthur. That country's Baltic fleet was destroyed when its T was
crossed by Admiral Togo at Tsushima Straits in this war. Theodore
Roosevelt won the Nobel Peace Prize for negotiating the Treaty of
Portsmouth, which ended this war. For ten points, name this East Asia
war, fought between the world's largest country and an Asian island.
Robert Louis {Stevenson} In one of this author's stories, a Hawaiian
named Keawe purchases an object that must be sold for less than was
paid for it. This author of "The Bottle Imp" wrote about the murder of
Danvers Carew in a novel in which the lawyer Gabriel Utterson
investigates the title characters. This man wrote a novel where (*)
Ben Gunn has been abandoned on the title feature. That work begins
with the lodger Billy Bones being given the "black spot," and sees Jim
Hawkins set sail with Long John Silver to find Captain Flint's loot.
For 10 points, name this author of The Curious Case of Dr. Jekyll and
Mr. Hyde and Treasure Island. Ludvig {Wittgenstein} This thinker noted
that there are overlapping features but no common one for games in
describing "family resemblance." This philosopher who invented the
picture theory of language wrote that "the world is everything that is
the case" and "where one cannot (*) speak, one must be silent" as the
first and last propositions of one of his early works. This thinker
also created a "beetle in a box" thought experiment, and wrote about
"language games" and "family resemblances" in the later Philosophical
Investigations. For 10 points, identify this Austrian-British
philosopher and author of Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus.
{echinoderms} or {echinodermata} One member of this phylum is Arbacia
punctulata, a model organism commonly studied by developmental
biologists because its eggs are transparent. Some members of this
phylum can chew through stone with an organ known as "Aristotle's
lantern," and members of this phylum have skeletons formed of calcite
ossicles. The ampulla and podia make up their (*) tube feet, which,
along with the madreporite, are a component of their water vascular
system. These deuterostomes exhibit bilateral symmetry in their
larvae, in contrast to their radially symmetric adult forms. For 10
points, name this phylum of spiny skinned invertebrates that includes
sea cucumbers and sea urchins. {Anna Karenina} One character in this
book discovers that Madame Stahl is bedridden only because of her
stubby legs as he visits a German spa. A railroad worker is killed
while two of this novel's characters are meeting, and it opens amidst
fallout from Stiva Oblonsky's cheating with his children's governess
on his wife Dolly. Konstantin (*) Levin is happily married to Kitty in
this novel. The title character's husband refuses a divorce, though
she falls from St. Petersburg high society by having an affair with
Count Vronsky anyway. The title woman eventually throws herself in
front of a train in, for 10 points, what novel by Leo Tolstoy? {New
World} Symphony or {Symphony No. 9 by Dvorak} (accept {From the New
World}; prompt on "Symphony No. 9" before Dvorak is read, and accept
afterwards) The composer of this work wrote that he simply "developed
[original themes] with all the resources of modern rhythms,
counterpoint, and orchestral colour". Three movements in E minor
surround the second movement of this work, which contains a cor
anglais melody, is played at a Largo tempo, and was based on The (*)
Song of Hiawatha. In the first movement of this symphony by the
composer of Slavonic Dances and the American Quartet, a solo flute
plays the "Swing Low, Sweet Chariot" theme. This piece was inspired by
African-American spirituals. For 10 points, name this last symphony of
Antonin Dvorak. {Bioshock} (do not accept "Bioshock Infinite") In one
level in this game, the protagonist has to wander around Fort Frolic
killing three artists who betrayed Sander Cohen. NPCs from this game
include Dr. Suchong and Dr. Tenenbaum, the latter of whom first
teaches the protagonist how to access a Gatherer's Garden. Telekinesis
and shooting bees are (*) plasmids in this game which can be accessed
by harvesting ADAM. This game is the first in a series set in an
underwater city founded by Adrew Ryan on a philosophy similar to Ayn
Rand's, and includes Little Sisters, who are protected by enemies
encased in diving suits. For 10 points, name this game set in Rapture
which contains Big Daddies. {Henry} [accept {Henry} III; accept
{Henry}, Duc de Guise; accept {Henry} IV or {Henry} of Navarre] One
king of this name was opposed by the Malcontents, and was later
assassinated by the friar Jacques Clement. That king with this name
became the first elected king of Poland-Lithuania. After the wedding
of one man of this name, a massacre of (*) Huguenots took place on St.
Bartholomew's Day. A Duke of Guise with this name led the Catholic
League in the final of the Wars of Religion that was fought between
three men of this name. One man of this name declared issued the Edict
of Nantes and declared that "Paris is worth a mass." For 10 points,
give this name of a king of France who was the 4th of his name, and
was from Navarre. Lord George {Gordon} {Byron}, 6th Baron Byron
(accept either or both underlined parts) This man wrote a dramatic
poem about a character tormented by the death of Astarte who summons
seven spirits. This author of Manfred wrote that the "widows of Ashur
are loud in their wail" as "the Assyrian came down like the wolf on
the fold" in "The (*) Destruction of Sennacherib." This poet notes
"every raven tress" of a woman in whom "all that's best of dark and
bright / Meet in her aspect and eyes" and who is "like the night." He
reverted a trope by writing about a Spaniard who is easily seduced by
women. An archetypal jaded hero is named after, for 10 points, what
English Romantic poet of "Don Juan" and "She Walks in Beauty?" {HTML}
or {HyperText Markup Language} Versions of this language are set by
prefacing files with a DOCTYPE declaration. Some programs read this
language in "quirks mode" but the "standard mode" is more common.
Objects in this language are managed by the Document Object Model, or
DOM. Invented by Tim Berners-Lee and maintained by the (*) W3C, this
language uses angled brackets called tags for defining elements such
as headers and bodies. The appearance of constructs made using this
language can be controlled using CSS, while interactive elements for
use with this language can be made with Javascript. The 5th standard
was recently released for, for 10 points, what markup language used to
design web pages? {Aztec} In one story from this myth system, a god
throws himself onto a funeral pyre after allowing himself to be
seduced by another god who had previously battled the primordial
crocodile Cipactli. The moon in this myth system is the head of a
goddess which was tossed into the sky by her brother, who is
represented as a (*) hummingbird. One god in this mythology replaced a
foot with a smoking mirror; that god is Tezcatlipoca. The creator god
of the mythology of this civilization was identified with the morning
star and appeared as a feathered serpent. Quetzacoatl was a god of,
for 10 points, what Mesoamerican civilization famously associated with
human sacrifice? Robert {Frost} One poem by this author talks about
hunters who "would have the rabbit out of hiding / To please the
yelping dogs" and describes a man who "moves in darkness as it seems
to me." Another of his poems says "Eden sank to grief" and (*)
"nothing gold can stay," while his collection North of Boston contains
a poem with the line "good fences make good neighbors. In the most
famous work of this author of "Mending Wall," he describes "leaves no
step had trodden black" on a path that "bent in the undergrowth." For
10 points, name this author who wrote that "two roads diverged in a
yellow wood" in "The Road Not Taken." Franz {Schubert} This man wrote
a song cycle setting 24 poems by Wilhelm Muller titled Winterreise or
Winter Journey. This composer wrote a string quartet based on
variations of his song Death and the Maiden. This composer used Goethe
as an influence in creating a work about a boy killed by an evil
spirit in The (*) Elf-King, as well as the lieder Gretchen at the
Spinning Wheel. This composer wrote a piano quintet in A minor in
which rising sextuplets represent the title animal's leaping through a
stream; that piece is The Trout Quintet. Whose 8th symphony in B
minor, for 10 points, contained only two movements at his death and is
labeled the Unfinished Symphony? {Iran-Contra} affair (accept
{Irangate} or {Contragate}) In response to this scandal, Bill Breeden
was jailed for stealing the sign of a street named after a
participant, leading Howard Zinn to deem him the "only person to be
imprisoned as a result" of this scandal. Secretary Fawn Hall shredded
several documents pertaining to this scandal, which caused John
Poindexter's resignation. It was investigated by the (*) Tower
Commission and it violated the Boland Amendment, which forbid US
assistance to a certain Nicaraguan rebel group. For 10 points, name
this scandal that implicated Oliver North and Ronald Reagan in the
sale of arms to Ayatollah Khomeini's government in order to fund some
Latin American rebels. {Hungary} A king of this country, who lost the
Battle of Baia to Stephen the Great, placed a raven at the center of
his Black Army's flag; that man was Matthias Corvinus. The kings of
this country traditionally wore a crown with a crooked cross called St
Stephen's Crown. This country's Revolution of 1848 was led by (*)
Lajos Kossuth. Goulash communism occurred in this country after it
failed to leave the Warsaw Pact. Soviet tanks entered this country to
replace Imre Nagy with Janos Kadar during its failed 1956 revolution.
The homeland of the Magyars is, for 10 points, what Central European
country that was part of a dual monarchy with Austria before World War
I? Ruth {Benedict} This anthropologist used the studies by Reo Fortune
of the Dobu Tribe, identifying them as "treacherous" in a work that
also studied the Kwakiutl and Zuni. The examples of restraint in
Pueblo cultures and abandon in the Great Plains in that work,Patterns
of Culture, are examples of her definition of culture as (*)
"personality-writ-large." This anthropologist used newspapers and
recordings in a work of "anthropology at a distance" because of her
inability to visit a country during WWII. That work contrasts the
guilt and shame cultures of America and Japan. For 10 points, name
this author of The Chrysanthemum and the Sword. {Frankenstein}; or,
The Modern Prometheus This book includes the character Margaret
Saville, who is addressed in letters throughout the book. One
character in this book reads Plutarch's Lives while simultaneously
observing the lives of the De Laceys, who live in a cottage. The
protagonist's friend Henry Clerval and his wife Elizabeth are (*)
murdered in this book by a character who flees to the North Pole. That
character had earlier forced Victor to make him a companion after that
character had been rejected by everyone it met due to its hideousness.
For ten points, name this book by Mary Shelley where the title
scientist creates a monster out of human body parts. {Rembrandt}
Harmeenszoon van Rijn This man painted a self-portrait of himself
wearing a beret and a turned- up collar. In one work by this artist,
Jesus and the twelve disciples are shaken by the title Storm on the
Sea of Galilee. This artist showed a Babylonian king turning from his
dinner to look at the Hebrew writing on the wall behind him in (*)
Belshazzar's Feast, while in another painting, a surgeon points out
the muscles and tendons in a dissected corpse. This artist's most
famous work displays a man waving a blue and gold banner and Frans
Banning Cocq. For 10 points, name this Dutch artist who painted The
Anatomy Lesson of Dr. Nicolaes Tulp and The Night Watch. {Bernoulli's}
principle or law or equation or effect (or other reasonable
equivalents) This statement includes a term equal to the kinetic
energy per unit volume, often called the "dynamic pressure". A law
giving the speed of outflow for a hole in a tank a certain height
above the ground is derived from this law, as is an effect in which
pressure is lowered in a constricted section of pipe. (*) Torricelli's
law and the Venturi effect result from this principle, a statement of
the conservation of energy in a fluid. This principle explains why an
increase in fluid speeds results in a decrease in pressure and is
often falsely used to explain lift on airplanes. For 10 points, name
this fundamental principle of fluid dynamics, named for a Swiss
mathematician. Emily {Dickinson} This writer claimed that "My life
closed twice before its close" in one poem and wrote about "a Service,
like a Drum" in another poem that opens with the line "I felt a
Funeral, in my Brain." This poet wrote of feeling "zero at the bone"
upon seeing a snake, which the speaker calls "A (*) narrow fellow in
the grass." In another poem, this poet wrote "how public, like a frog"
it was to be somebody after exclaiming "I'm nobody! Who are you?" This
poet enters into a carriage with Immortality and the title figure in
one poem. For 10 points, identify this reclusive "Belle of Amherst"
who wrote the poem "Because I could not stop for Death." {prices} When
this quantity changes, the substitution effect occurs. A consumption
increase paradoxically accompanies a rise in this quantity for Giffen
goods. This quantity is combined with opportunity cost to form the
marginal cost of purchase. A deadweight loss occurs when this quantity
is above or below equilibrium, and its namesake (*) discrimination
occurs when it is not equal for all consumers. The CPI is a
measurement of 300 or so of these values which can be found at
equilibrium by the intersection of the supply and demand curves. For
10 points, name this value which rises during inflation, the amount of
money a buyer pays a seller for a good. Republic of {Croatia} This
nation contains the city of Pula, which lies at the tip of the Istria
peninsula, whose capital is Pazin. Nearby to Istria is this country's
principal seaport, the city of Rijeka . This country also contains the
coastal region of Dalmatia, which, along with Pula and Rijeka, lies on
the (*) Adriatic Sea. This country contains the western part of
Slavonia, whose largest city in this country is Osijek, located on the
Drava River. The highest point of this country is Dinara, located in
an extension of the Alps. For 10 points, name this NATO member country
that surrounds Bosnia and Herzegovina on two sides and has its capital
at Zagreb. Eugene {O'Neill} This man wrote an expressionist play about
an brutish ocean liner worker who experiences an identity crisis,
while his best known comedy sees Richard's mother worry about him
reading subversive books. This author of Ah, Wilderness! and The Hairy
Ape wrote a trilogy of plays set in the Civil War based on the (*)
Oresteia named Mourning Becomes Electra. This playwright wrote a play
in which a group of people muse on their pipe dreams and await the
salesman Hickman in Harry Hope's bar. In another play, tuberculosis
and a morphine addiction threaten members of the Tyrone family. For 10
points, who wrote The Iceman Cometh andLong Day's Journey into Night?
Battle of {Hastings} This battle opened when the jester Taillefer
attacked a soldier while reciting the Song of Roland. After this
battle, victorious troops were ambushed in the Malfosse. One side in
this battle employed housecarls and effectively used a shield wall to
defend against archer attacks. This battle took place after Tostig's
brother defeated a Viking invasion at (*) Stamford Bridge that was led
by Harold Hardrada. This battle occurred at Senlac Hill, where its
loser was shot in the eye. The Bayeux Tapestry depicts Harold
Godwinson's loss at this battle. For 10 points, name this 1066 victory
for William the Conqueror. {angiosperms} The oldest known specimen
belonging to this plant clade is Archaefructus lianongenesis, and the
male and female gametophytes of this plant clade are greatly reduced,
having only three and seven cells, respectively. This group of
organisms is characterized by the presence of a 3n (*) endosperm in
the fertilized seed, and following fertilization in these plants, a
pericarp forms. These organisms have micropyles through which double
fertilization occurs. This clade includes monocots and dicots, and
plants in this clade notably have carpels and stamens. Fruits are
formed from flowers in, for 10 points, what group of flowering plants
contrasted with gymnosperms? {Olmec}s This civilization may have been
the descendant of the mythical Xia dynasty, based on a similarity in
facial features found in masks, which this civilization was known for
carving in jade. Motifs in this civilization's art include the
elongated man and were-jaguars. A major center of this civilization
was uncovered at San Lorenzo, while another is at (*) La Venta. This
civilization was argued by Matthew Stirling to be the first based in
Mesoamerica. The most famous relics of this civilization were made
from basalt and weigh several tons. For 10 points, name this
civilization best known for its statues of gigantic heads.
{combustion} reactions (prompt on "oxidation" before it is read) In
the cumene process, this is done to cumene in order to form cumene
hydroperoxide. Georg Stahl first proposed the phlogiston theory of
this process. The maximum efficiency of a common machine that uses
this process can be attained by the Carnot cycle. Surpassing the (*)
flash point will allow this type of oxidation reaction to occur, while
surpassing the autoignition temperature will cause it to occur
spontaneously. In the complete form of these reactions, oxygen reacts
with a hydrocarbon to produce carbon dioxide and water. For 10 points,
name these reactions which can be simply described as blowing things
up. {Euripides} In one play by this writer, a supposed orphan is
reunited with his mother after she recognizes a basket he has. This
playwright of Ion wrote two plays about a woman nearly sacrificed to
allow her father's troops to set sail; those plays are about
Iphigenia. The infant Astyanax is killed in one of his plays in which
the title characters are variously captured and made to (*) suffer by
the Greeks; those characters include Andromache and Hecuba. In another
of his plays, the title woman kills Glauce with a poisoned robe after
Jason abandons her. For 10 points, name this Ancient Greek tragedian
who wrote The Trojan Women and Medea. The {Swing} A rake lies at the
bottom of this work, and a fluffy white dog to the right of it peeks
over a bridge. Gabriel Doyen was initially asked to paint this work's
subject, but refused and passed on the commission. A stone cupid
observes to the left of the central figure in this painting, while two
more cupids observe from the right. The central figure's lover (*)
hides in the bushes at the bottom of this painting and gazes lewdly as
her husband pushes the title device unawares. For 10 points, Jean-
Honore Fragonard painted a girl with a billowing pink dress kicking
her shoe off while riding the titular device in what masterpiece of
the Rococo style? {Paul} [accept {Saul} before it is mentioned] This
man was baptized by Ananias of Damascus, and in one of his writings he
says to "put on the full armor of God" to guard against the Devil.
This man traveled extensively with Barnabas, and he wrote one well-
known work with (*) "Timothy our brother." In that work, he notes that
without love, he is like a "noisy gong" or a "crashing cymbal." This
author of Ephesians and 1 Corinthians was responsible for holding the
coats of those who stoned Saint Stephen. This man converted to
Christianity after he was struck blind by God on the road to Damascus.
For 10 points, name this biblical figure previously named Saul who
wrote many epistles. Andrew {Jackson} This president was shot by
Charles Dickinson and vetoed a bill that would have constructed a road
through Kentucky known as the Maysville Road. Richard Lawrence
attempted to assassinate this man, whose wife Rachel Donelson died
shortly after one election. This man's first Secretary of State
resigned in order to end the (*) Peggy Eaton Affair. This president
and Nicholas Biddle fought the "Bank war" over the renewal of second
Bank of the United States' charter. John Quincey Adams supposedly beat
this man in the 1824 election as the result of a "Corrupt Bargain."
For 10 points, what seventh President of the United States was known
as "Old Hickory"? State of {Libya} [accept {Libya}n Arab Jamahiriya]
One leader of this country contracted Brown and Root to construct the
world's largest underground network of pipes in order to create the
"Great Manmade River" to irrigate this country. This nation's capital
city was bombed by the United States in response for its alleged
support of the 1986 Berlin nightclub attack. Two citizens of this
country were tried for planning the (*) Lockerbie bombing. In 2011,
rebels in this country stormed Green Square and started a National
Transitional Council. A leader of this country was killed in Sirte
after the fall of Benghazi. For 10 points, name this North African
nation formerly led by Muammar al-Gaddafi in Tripoli. {Athena} (accept
any given name before mention) One name for this goddess stems from
her birthplace near the lake Tritonis. This goddess gave a box to the
three daughters of Cecrops which contained the offspring of
Hephaestus's failed attempts to rape this figure. In contrast to
Poseidon's gift of a salt spring, this goddess gifted an (*) olive
tree to a city desiring a name. This daughter of Metis sprung fully
formed from another god's head, and had the epithets "Pallas" and
"gray-eyed." She lost a weaving contest to Arachne, whom she turned
into a spider. For 10 points, name this daughter of Zeus, a Greek
goddess of wisdom who is equivalent to Minerva in Roman mythology.
Jean {Sibelius} The final of this composer's seven symphonies is a one
movement piece titled a "Fantasia sinfonica." One of this man's works
was part of incidental music for his brother-in-law's play and was
literally titled "Sad Waltz." This composer of Valse Triste titled one
of his works (*) "Impromptu," and he used an English horn to depict a
scene from the underworld with the title waterfowl mournfully swimming
in his The Swan of Tuonela. This composer included pieces based off
the Kalevala in the LemminkÃ¤inen Suite. This man composed a piece
protesting Russian censorship of his homeland. For 10 points, name
this composer of the patrioticFinlandia. Christopher {Marlowe} George
Chapman finished this writer's poem about a lover who nearly drowns
swimming across the Hellespont titled "Hero and Leander." In a play by
this man, the title character burns a copy of the Qu'ran after
conquering Babylon and becoming emperor of Persia. The most famous
play by this writer of (*) Tamburlaine sees one character poison his
daughter Abigail and opens with a parody of Machiavelli. In that play,
the title character alternately betrays the Christians and the Turks
before falling in a boiling cauldron. The merchant Barrabas is the
title character of, for 10 points, what playwright's The Jew of Malta?
{Impressionism} (accept word forms) This movement emerged after an
"Anonymous Society" organized an independent exhibition after being
rejected from the Salon. The Child's Bath was a painting by an
American member of this art movement, Mary Cassatt. One member of this
school painted the Houses of Parliament under varying (*) weather
conditions and another painted Van Gogh leaning over a boat rail in
The Luncheon of the Boating Party. This school received its name from
a painting of a sunrise over Le Havre harbor, and one artist from this
school painted haystacks and water lilies. For 10 points, Auguste
Renoir and Claude Monet were of what school of art? Michael {Faraday}
This man used an experiment containing a charged metal ball,
insulating thread, and an ice-pail to confirm Gauss's law. Liquids may
contain this man's namesake ripples, and alongside Joseph Henry, this
man discovered that moving a magnet near a conducting loop can cause a
current in the loop. The creator of a (*) direct-current generator
that produces an emf constant in time, this man names a device that
causes the total electric field at every point inside it to be zero;
that is his namesake "cage." For 10 points, name this man with a
namesake law of induction and whom the SI unit of capacitance is named
after. Kenzaburō {Ōe} One of this writer's stories describes a cancer
victim who wears cellophane goggles and is titled "Teach Us To Outgrow
Our Madness." In another of his novels, the Korean Li teaches a group
of boys to hunt birds. Those boys are abandoned by a village after the
onset of a plague in this man's novel (*) Nip the Buds, Shoot the
Kids. In his other novels, Mitsusaburo's friend hangs himself after
sodomizing himself with a cucumber, while in another, Bird's son is
born with a brain hernia. For 10 points, name this Japanese author of
The Silent Cry whose novels like A Personal Matter are frequently
inspired by his own mentally retarded son. Hermann {Hesse} In one work
by this author, Leo abandons the members of the League, who include
Paul Klee and Plato; that work is Journey to the East. Pistorius
teaches Emil Sinclair in this author's Demian, while a work set in
Castalia sees Joseph Knect occupy the position of (*) Magister Ludi.
Along with The Glass Bead Game, he wrote a work about a friend of
Govinda who learns enlightenment from a ferryman and in another a
visit to the Magic Theater follows Harry Haller's identification with
the title man-beast. What German author, for 10 points, wrote the
self-discovery themed works Siddhartha and Steppenwolf? {glacier}s
(prompt on "ice sheet" before it is read) Bulb-like lobes are evident
in this entity's Malaspina example, which is one of the Piedmont types
of this body. The absence of these bodies leads to isostatic rebound
after initial crust subsidence. Holes known as moulins may occur in
these bodies, and elongated hills called (*) drumlins can be formed by
these bodies. Ablation zones are regions where these bodies lose mass,
and the tracks of debris they leave behind are called moraines. The
majority of the world's fresh water is contained in these bodies,
examples of which include ice sheets. Icebergs break off of, for 10
points, what large moving masses of ice? {F}idel {Castro} (prompt on
partial answer before "Raul" is read) In a New York Times article,
this man was called "anti-Communist" by Herbert Matthews. Operation
Verano was an attack on this man's position in the Sierra Maestra,
where he hid with the rest of the 26th of July Movement. After a
failed assault on the Moncada Barracks, this man delivered the
"History will absolve me" speech against the regime of Fulgenico (*)
Batista, whom he fought with "Che" Guevara. A CIA trained brigade
failed to overthrow this man in the Bay of Pigs invasion. Facing
illness, this man ceded the presidency in 2008 to his brother Raul.
For 10 points, name this leader of the Cuban Revolution. {Tartuffe},
or The Impostor (or {Tartuffe}, ou l'Imposteur) In this work, one
character mocks Monsieur Loyal as he tries to announce a message.
Previous to the events of this play, Argas had given the protagonist
some incriminating papers to hide. The title character of this play
calls himself a "guilty man" to save himself after the father of Damis
hides (*) under a table to catch that character in the act of
attempting to seduce Elmire. A deus ex machina in the form of an
officer of Louis XIV arrests the title character of this play at its
end, saving Orgon from being evicted by the title character. For 10
points, name this play about a religious hypocrite, a work of Moliere.
{entropy} Lieb and Yngvason's axiomatic definition of this quantity
builds on Caratheodory's. The Sackur-Tetrode equation gives its value
for an ideal gas, and for an isothermal reversible process the change
in this value is the energy transferred divided by the temperature.
This qunatity is related to the number of (*) possible microstates.
The third law of thermodynamics defines this value to be zero in a
perfect crystal at absolute zero, and the second law of thermodynamics
states the value of this quantity for the universe increases in a
spontaneous process. For 10 points, identify this measure of the
degree of disorder in a system, symbolized S. William {Golding} This
author wrote of Fa and Lok, who are among the last of the
Neanderthals, in his book The Inheritors. In another of his novels,
Mr. Campbell and Mr. Davidson note that the title character failed to
take off his seaboots, suggesting he hallucinated being stranded. In
the most famous novel of this author of (*) Pincher Martin, a
parachutist is mistaken for "the Beast" and a conch shell becomes a
symbol of power. In that novel, Piggy's glasses are used to start fire
and the title entity is a pig head impaled on a stick. For 10 points,
what author wrote about some boys trapped on an island in Lord of the
Flies? {Orpheus} In the Metamorphoses, this figure tells the tales of
Ganymede and Pygmalion. Heracles was tutored by this man's brother
Linus, and his head supposedly floated down the Hebrus River after he
was killed by being torn to pieces. This demigod is crucial to
protecting the Argonauts from the (*) Sirens. In one account, this
man's wife is pursued by the satyr Aristaeus, causing her to be bitten
and killed by a snake. This son of the epic muse Calliope lost his
chance to save his love when he looked back while walking out of the
underworld. For 10 points, name this lover of Eurydice who was amazing
at playing the lyre. {Moby Dick}: The Whale One character in this book
hides himself out of modesty when putting on his boots, while another
offers a gold doubloon as a reward. The black boy Pip goes insane in
this novel, and the Persian Fedallah prophesies his employer will meet
his death from hemp rope. One character builds his own (*) coffin in
this book that contains the line "from hell's heart I stab at thee."
That Quaker Starbuck and the harpooner Queequeg served on the Pequod
in this novel with a man who says "Call me Ishmael." For 10 points,
Captain Ahab relentlessly pursues the title white creature in what
novel by Herman Melville? {Greenland} Nunaoil is the state-owned
petroleum company of this polity that has its highest point at
Gunnbjorn Fjeld [Gun-byorn F-yeld]. Although the United States failed
to purchase this island from its owner after World War II, the United
States continues to maintain the Thule Air Base on this island's
northwest coast. The world's largest (*) national park and the second
largest municipality in the world, Sermersooq, are located on this
island that has its capital at Nuuk. Kalaalisut is the official
language, but Danish is also used in, for 10 points, what second
largest island of the world, ironically named because the majority of
it covered in ice? Commonwealth of {Australia} Since December 2012,
this country has required plain packaging for tobacco, and in July, it
switched from a carbon tax to a cap-and-trade system. This country is
the home of the Wikileaks political party. A detention center on Manus
Island was reestablished in 2012 for (*) asylum seekers to this
country, who often aim for this country's Christmas Island in
dangerously overfilled boats. This country's Labor Party was
previously headed by Julia Gillard until she was ousted for Kevin Rudd
in an attempt to win fall elections against the Liberal Party. Kevin
Rudd nevertheless lost his spot as prime minister of, for 10 points,
what Pacific island country now headed by Tony Abbott? David Émile
{Durkheim} This thinker discussed "social facts" and the requirements
for sociology to be considered a social science in Rules of the
Sociological Method. One of his works distinguished between mechanical
and organic solidarity and argued that the transition between those
types of societies caused a shift in the title (*) Division of Labor
in Society. Another book by this man explained the egotistic,
altruistic, and fatalistic types of its title phenomenon, as well as
the confusion caused by a concept called the "lack of social norms";
that concept is anomie. For 10 points, name this French sociologist
and author of Suicide. {Rhapsody in Blue} A Cuban clave rhythm and
rubato are used within this work that calls for an accordion and banjo
in an orchestration by the composer of the Grand Canyon Suite. Ferde
Grofé orchestrated this piece and Paul Whiteman commissioned this
piece to be played at a concert entitled An (*) Experiment in Modern
Music. It accompanies a segment in Fantasia 2000 depicting a
construction site and ice skaters in Depression-era New York. This
piece by the composer of An American in Paris and Porgy and Bess opens
with a trill and 17-note clarinet glissando. For 10 points, name this
"jazz concerto" composed by George Gershwin. {Mollusca} (or
{mollusc}s) The trochophore is a ciliated larval stage in the life
cycle of many marine organisms in this phylum. One class of this
phylum possesses excretory organs known as nephridia, and that same
class undergoes a process known as torsion, during which the internal
organs rotate and the anus becomes positioned above the head. This
phylum includes (*) chitons which possess a shell divided into eight
dorsal plates. Members of this phylum have a muscular foot, a visceral
mass, and a mantle, and some use a radula to scrape up food. For 10
points, name this invertebrate phylum which includes snails, clams,
and the giant squid. {United Kingdom} of Great {Britain} and Northern
Ireland or {U.K.} (accept any underlined portion; accept {England})
One work from this country shows the title household object surrounded
by detritus, and is titled My Bed. Another work from the same movement
is a shark suspended in a tank of formaldehyde and is titled The
Physical Impossibility of Death in the Mind of Someone Living. Those
works were shortlisted for a modern art prize here named after a man
who painted the "dead and dying" being thrown off the title (*) Slave
Ship, as well as a blurry painting of a train subtitled "The Great
Western Railway"; that prize is hosted by the Tate Gallery. For 10
points, name this home of Tracey Emin, Damien Hirst, and the artist of
Rain, Steam and Speed, J. M. W. Turner. {California} While running for
this state's Senate, Dick Tuck made a speech asserting that the dead
could still vote. Sir Francis Drake claimed what became this state for
England as "New Albion." In this state, the Sleepy Lagoon murder
helped spark a riot against people who wore zoot suits. Dan White
assassinated the first publicly (*) gay officeholder in this state.
Harvey Milk was from this state, which was once represented by Richard
Nixon. John C. Fremont helped conquer what became this state during
the Mexican-American War with the help of the Bear Flag Revolt. A
discovery at Sutter's Mill caused--for 10 points--49ers to rush into
what state seeking gold? {tension} When an object is wrapped around a
round object by static friction, this quantity grows exponentially
with angle, and when divided by cross-sectional area this quantity
yields stress. In an Atwood machine, these forces oppose gravity and
can be set equal to each other to solve the (*) pulley system. In a
pendulum, this force moves the weight sideways, although it does no
work, as it is perpendicular to the weight's motion. Its effects on
springs are described by Hooke's law, and if it is absent, the system
is said to be in slack. For 10 points, what is this force everywhere
inside a string, contrasted with compression? Battle of {Marathon} The
losers of this battle retreated to the Dog's Tail. One side had
previously punished an expedition that sacked Sardis by burning
Eretria. Though reinforcements to this battle were delayed by the
Carenia festival, the departure of the losing side's cavalry prompted
the victors of this battle to attack. Miltiades commanded one side in
this battle, the loss of which stymied (*) Darius's attempt at an
invasion. This was the final battle in the first Persian invasion of
Greece. For 10 points, name this 490 BCE battle after which according
to legend Pheidippides ran 26 miles to alert Athens of victory, the
basis for a type of long run. {commutative} property [or
{commutativity}, {commute}, or other word forms] In quantum mechanics,
certain pairs of linear operators that lack this property, such as
position and momentum, are said to be complementary. Groups which have
an operation for which this property holds are called abelian. It
generally does not hold for matrix (*) multiplication, division, or
subtraction, while it does hold for the dot product, and holds along
with the associative property for addition and multiplication. For 10
points, name this mathematical property which states that changing the
order of operands does not change the result of a binary operation, or
that a times b equals b times a. The {Song of Roland} [accept La
{Chanson de Roland}] In this work, Alde dies of grief upon hearing of
the death of her betrothed. The sun stands still in this poem to let
one army chase another that drowns in the River Ebro, and this poem
ends with Gabriel commanding a king to free a city from a pagan siege.
In this non-Italian work, the sword (*) Durendal belongs to the title
character. The Twelve Peers die in this work because of Ganelon's
treachery. Olivier dies in this work alongside the title character who
blows his oliphaunt so hard his temple bursts. The Battle of
Ronceveaux Pass takes place in, for 10 points, what French tale about
the title nephew of Charlemagne? {Charles V} of the Holy Roman Empire
(or {Charles I} of Spain; prompt on "Charles") During this ruler's
reign, the Battle of Villalar occurred, leading to the defeat of the
Revolt of the Comuneros. This ruler gained Burgundy and Flanders after
signing the Treaty of Madrid, a result of his victory at the Battle of
Pavia against Francis I. He directly inherited one throne from his
grandfather Maximilian I due to the death of his father Philip the
Handsome and the incapacity of his mother (*) Joanna the Mad. This man
who sent Magellan on his circumnavigation of the Earth was the father
of Phillip II. For 10 points, name this man who was both a king of
Spain and the Holy Roman Emperor. {Peer Gynt}, Op. 23 One section of
this piece depicts "A Stormy Evening on the Sea" during the homecoming
of the main character, who had earlier met a Bedouin who performs
"Anitra's Dance." A lullaby is sung by Solveig in the last of eight
movements in this work sometimes arranged in two (*) suites. One
section of this piece begins quietly with staccato eighth notes before
frantically gaining in volume and tempo as the main character flees
trolls, while during another an oboe and flute play as the sun rises.
"Morning Mood" and "In the Hall of the Mountain King" are pieces from,
for 10 points, what incidental music composed by Edvard Grieg for a
Henrik Ibsen play? Marcus Tullius {Cicero} This man frequently
corresponded in letters with Titus Atticus. This man defended Milo,
the murderer of Clodius Pulcher, who had earlier helped exile this
man. This man modeled his Phillipics off of Demosthenes’s works. This
man exclaimed “O the times, o the morals” in a speech in which he
exposed the (*) Catilinian Conspiracy. This man had his hand and head
nailed to the Rostra after he was killed, which resulted from the
proscription placed on this man by Mark Antony due to this man’s
attacks on Antony and the Second Triumvirate. For 10 points, name this
famously eloquent orator in the Roman Republic. {Rosh Hashanah}
Alternate names for this holiday include Yom Hatzikaron, Yom Hadin,
and Yom Truah. It marks the beginning of the days of return, or
teshuvah, which are concluded ten days later by the Sabbath of
Complete Rest. Some people observe tashlich on this day by throwing
bread crumbs into a river or stream, and a traditional dish served on
this holiday is carrot tzimmes. Celebrated on the first of the month
of (*) Tishre, this holiday features the blowing of the shofar, and
the eating of apples and honey in hopes of a sweet new year. For 10
points, give the name of the Jewish new year, the first of the High
Holidays that are completed by Yom Kippur. {sort}ing algorithm
Compared to other types of this procedure, one type of it performs
better the closer it is to completion, scaling from big O of N squared
to big O of N . The shell type of this procedure improves on that
previous insertion type. The last element of the partition is
sometimes chosen as the (*) pivot position in a type of this procedure
that uses a "divide-and-conquer" and recursive algorithm; that type is
named for its speed. One of these procedures allows elements to "rise"
to the top by comparing them and appropriately swapping them based on
their values. There are bubble and quick types of, for 10 points, what
computer science procedure in which a list is placed in order? Jorge
Luis {Borges} This author wrote a story in which a woodsman kills a
king to steal the title one-sided object, "The Disc," and in another
story by this writer, the detective Erik Lonnrot is led into a trap by
three kabbalistic murders. This author of "Death and the Compass"
wrote about a single point that contains (*) all of the universe in
the story "The Aleph" and he described Dr. Albert's murder by the
German spy Yu Tsun in another story. In another story, the title
location contains hexagonal rooms and every possible 410 page book.
For 10 points, what Argentinian writer's collection Ficciones contains
the stories "The Garden of Forking Paths" and "The Library of Babel"?
the {assassination} of Abraham {Lincoln} [accept obvious equivalents]
Following this event, David Herold surrendered to federal troops while
hiding in Richard Garnett's barn. The perpetrator of this event, who
was not stopped by Major Henry Rathbone, was shot by Thomas Corbett.
Herold, George Atzerodt, Lewis Powell and Mary Surratt were hanged as
co-conspirators in this event. The phrase "his name is (*) Mudd"
refers to the doctor who treated the perpetrator of this event. Before
committing this action, that man interrupted the play Our American
Cousin at Ford's Theatre before yelling "Sic semper tyrannis!". For 10
points, what event occurred when John Wilkes Booth shot the 16th
president of America? {Guernica} A tapestry copy of this painting in
the New York UN building was temporarily covered with a blue curtain,
and this work was exhibited with a poem by Paul Eluard. A soldier
holding a broken sword lies at the bottom of this painting with a
flower in his hand while a ghostly woman reaches in from a window
holding a (*) candle. It depicts a market day and a light bulb in the
form of an eye along with a woman grieving over her child. A bull with
smoke for a tail and a screaming horse being pierced with a spear
appear at the left of this painting. For 10 points, Pablo Picasso
painted what mural in response to the bombing of a Basque town?
{Boston Tea Party} The William was destroyed before reaching this
event and a related event saw the burning of the Peggy Stewart.
Similar events were prevented in Charleston and Philadelphia and
Charles O'Connor was stripped naked and sent home for thievery during
this event. The Beaver, Eleanor, and Dartmouth weren't allowed by
Governor Thomas (*) Hutchinson to return to England, leading to this
event. Just prior to this event, a meeting at Old South Meeting House
ended with members of the Sons of Liberty streaming to Griffith's
Wharf dressed as Mohawks. For 10 points, name this 1774 event
protesting the Townshend Duties, where the namesake product was
emptied into Boston Harbor. {angiosperms} The oldest known specimen
belonging to this plant clade is Archaefructus lianongenesis, and the
male and female gametophytes of this plant clade are greatly reduced,
having only three and seven cells, respectively. This group of
organisms is characterized by the presence of a 3n (*) endosperm in
the fertilized seed, and following fertilization in these plants, a
pericarp forms. These organisms have micropyles through which double
fertilization occurs. This clade includes monocots and dicots, and
plants in this clade notably have carpels and stamens. Fruits are
formed from flowers in, for 10 points, what group of flowering plants
contrasted with gymnosperms? Richard {Wagner} In this composer's first
opera, Arindal gains immortality with Ada. In addition to The Fairies,
this man wrote an opera in which the title character rejects the
Venusberg and the Pope's staff sprouts leaves; that opera is
Tannhauser. Walther performs the "Prize Song" to gain entry in to the
title guild in this composer's The (*) Mastersingers of Nuremberg, and
this man frequently used the leitmotif. In one of his operas, the
Liebestod aria is sung by Isolde over Tristan's dead body, and in
another, Brünnhilde appears with the title group after the "Ride of
the Valkyries." For 10 points, The Rheingold is the first opera in
what German composer's Ring Cycle? {"Howl"} This poem describes a
group "who broke down crying in white gymnasiums naked and trembling."
It contains a footnote that repeatedly calls out "Holy!" and was
published by Lawrence Ferlinghetti's City Lights Bookstore. This poem
describes people "dragging themselves through the negro streets at
dawn looking for an angry (*) fix," was dedicated to Carl Solomon, and
contains the frequent themes of Moloch and the line "I am with you in
Rockland." This poem that underwent an obscenity trial opens "I saw
the best minds of my generation destroyed by madness, starving
hysterical naked." For 10 points, name this poem by the Beat poet
Allen Ginsberg. {Hera} This goddess was first wooed by her husband
when he disguised himself as a cuckoo and hid in her bosom. Ixion was
condemned to Tartarus for making advances on this goddess who blinded
Tiresias after he ruled in favor of women in an argument. This goddess
placed the eyes of the watchman (*) Argos in her favorite animal, the
peacock. This goddess refused to allow Leto a place to give birth,
sent a gadfly to sting Io, and placed snakes in the crib of Heracles,
all out of jealousy over her husband's affairs. For 10 points, name
this goddess of marriage, a wife of Zeus and queen of the Greek gods.
{superconductivity} [accept {superconductor}s] Objects with this
property have a characteristic coherence length and London penetration
depth, and can be used in SQUID magnetometers. It can be described by
Ginzburg-Landau theory, and a perovskite-based compound can maintain
this property at a temperature above 77K, and is called (*) YBCO. The
Type I of this phenomenon is explained as the condensation of
electrons into Cooper pairs by BCS theory and this effect causes the
expulsion of magnetic fields in the Meissner effect, which can allow
materials with this property to levitate. For 10 points, materials
lowered below their critical temperature have what property in which
there is no resistance? Gian Lorenzo {Bernini} An unconventional work
by this artist depicts the slightly turned head of one of his loves,
with lips parted and her chemise somewhat undone, unlike more formal
commissioned works. In addition to Bust of Constanza Bonarelli, this
artist portrayed the moment of the sling in motion in a version of (*)
David. Another sculpture shows one figure at the moment she transforms
into a laurel tree to evade a pursuing god. He also created a work in
which the title nun lies upon a cloud, as an angel raises a golden
arrow above her. For 10 points, name this Italian sculptor of Apollo
and Daphne and The Ecstasy of Saint Teresa. {Bart} Simpson (prompt on
{Simpson} before mention; accept El {Bart}o) In one episode, this
character visits England after finding a one thousand dollar bill,
while in another a blizzard gives this character an extra day to study
the American Revolution. In one episode, this character asks his
nemesis to sing Gilbert and Sullivan; he had earlier foiled that
nemesis's attempt to frame a clown for armed robbery. This nemesis of
(*) Sideshow Bob tried to jump over a gorge with his skateboard and he
opens every episode of the show he appears on by writing on a
chalkboard. His catchphrases include "Cowabunga" and "eat my shorts."
For 10 points name this brother of Lisa and eldest child of the
Simpson family. Mikhail {Gorbachev} As he prepared to sign a treaty,
this leader was placed under house arrest by the State Committee on
the State of Emergency, leading to the August Coup. One leader
supposedly stated "we can do business together," while talking about
this man. This man allowed for a policy of "my way" in ending the (*)
Brezhnev Doctrine. Before being replaced by Boris Yeltsin, this man
was told to "tear down" a certain structure. This man pursued
restructuring, or perestroika, as well as a policy of openness, or
glasnost, during his tenure, which also saw him negotiate with Ronald
Reagan. For 10 points, name this final General Secretary of the Soviet
Union. The {Three Musketeers} (or Les {Trois Mousquetaires}) In this
novel, the servant Bazin wants his master to enter the church, while
the protagonist employs the servant Planchet. One character in this
novel seduces the prison guard John Felton, poisons the protagonist's
love interest Constance Bonacieux, and is branded for a past crime
with the fleur- de-lis. That woman, (*) Milady de Winter, steals a
diamond brooch from the Duke of Buckingham to reveal his affair with
the Queen of France in a plot directed by Cardinal Richelieu. The
title characters Athos, Aramis, and Porthos are joined by D'Artagnan
in, for 10 points, what novel by Alexandre Dumas? {ideal gas} law One
derivation of this law equates the dot product of the position and
force vectors to the surface integral of the force exerted by the
walls of a container; that method uses statistical mechanics. Adding
the terms lowercase a and b to this law to account for the forces
between particles and the space they fill gives the (*) Van der Waals
equation. It can be rearranged to give density and the molar mass.
When the kinetic molecular theory's assumptions fail at low
temperature and high pressure, this law fails as well. Charles's and
Boyle's Laws are included within, for 10 points, what law usually
stated P V equals n R T? Oscar {Wilde} This man wrote a story about
Lord Arthur Saville, who attempts to fulfill a prophecy before a
marriage by murdering someone, while the Dance of the Seven Veils
leads to John the Baptist's beheading in a French play by this man.
Along with Salome, he penned the line "each man kills the thing he
loves" in his poem "The (*) Ballad of Reading Gaol" ["Redding Jail"].
Mrs Erlynne protects her daughter by lying about borrowing the title
object in this man's play Lady Windermere's Fan and in his only novel,
Basil Hallward paints the title object, which ages and grows more
grotesque as its subject sins. For 10 points, name this author of The
Picture of Dorian Gray. Oscar Wilde This man wrote a story about Lord
Arthur Saville, who attempts to fulfill a prophecy before a marriage
by murdering someone, while the Dance of the Seven Veils leads to John
the Baptist's beheading in a French play by this man. Along with
Salome, he penned the line "each man kills the thing he loves" in his
poem "The (*) Ballad of Reading Gaol" ["Redding Jail"]. Mrs Erlynne
protects her daughter by lying about borrowing the title object in
this man's play Lady Windermere's Fan and in his only novel, Basil
Hallward paints the title object, which ages and grows more grotesque
as its subject sins. For 10 points, name this author of The Picture of
Dorian Gray. {Ohio} River A small portion of this river's watershed
extends into Virginia via the Big Sandy and Tug Fork Rivers. The
cities of Parkersburg and Wheeling lie on this river. This river's
main tributary is spanned by the Fort Duquesne Bridge and its
secondary tributary is spanned by the Fort Pitt Bridge. Those two
rivers are the (*) Allegheny and Monongahela Rivers respectively and
confluence just feet from the two aforementioned bridges in Pittsburgh
to form this river that discharges at Cairo. For 10 points, name this
largest right tributary of the Mississippi River, from which the state
containing Cleveland derives its name. Carl {Jung} This man wrote
about the fourth evil side of God in his book Answer to Job and
described the contrasexual pairing of men and women with the term
syzygy. This thinker examined the schizophrenic fantasies of Frank
Miller and postulated an "acausal connecting principle" called (*)
synchronicity. The Myers-Briggs personality test is based on the work
of this psychologist who made a distinction between extroverts and
introverts and examples of a term he studied include the Animus and
the Shadow. For 10 points, what psychologist broke with Freud over the
nature of the libido and described archetypes and the collective
unconscious? {Vietnam} [do not accept or prompt on "North Vietnam" or
"South Vietnam"] According to this modern-day country's folklore, Thi
Sach was killed by Su Ting, which led to a rebellion by Trung Trac.
Paratroopers were dropped into this modern-day country during
Operation Castor, which preceded a battle that ended with the
surrender of Henri Navarre's troops. Emperor Bao Dai was ousted in a
1955 election by Ngo Dinh (*) Diem in this modern-day country. This
modern-day country was divided in the 1954 Geneva Accords, and was
reunited after the 1975 Fall of Saigon. Ho Chi Minh led this country's
northern half during a war with the United States. For 10 points, name
this communist nation with a capital at Hanoi. Rainer Marie {Rilke} An
animal in one of this poet's pieces "paces in cramped circles, over
and over"; that animal is The Panther. He is the author of the thing-
poems and a work which compares unrequited love to Gaspara Stampa.
After being asked for advice by Franz Kappus, this writer sent him the
(*) Letters to a Young Poet. One of his collections dedicated to Wera
Knoop concerns a figure this poet calls "the god with the lyre," while
another of his collections opens "Who, if I cried out, would hear me
among the angelic orders?". For 10 points, name this German author of
both the Sonnets to Orpheus and The Duino Elegies. {Arnolfini Wedding}
(accept {Arnolfini Portrait}; accept {Arnolfini Double Portrait};
accept anything else that includes Arnolfini and/or him getting
hitched) The background of this painting depicts scenes from the
Passion of Christ as a feather-duster hangs nearby. Summer is
signified by a cherry tree seen through an open window in this
painting, and the artist of this work signed his name and "fuit hic"
in it on a back wall. A single candle is lighted on a (*) chandelier
at the top of this painting, and a convex mirror reflects the central
scene. A fluffy dog at the forefront of this painting and clogs lying
on the floor signify the title couple's wealth, while a woman in this
painting wears bright green. For 10 points, the title Italian merchant
is shown holding his wife's hand in what van Eyck painting? {moment of
inertia} The stretch rule states that this quantity does not change
when an object is distorted along its axis of rotation. The tensor for
this quantity is symmetric, and is diagonal in some orientation,
defining an object's principal axes. If this value is given for one
axis of rotation it can be found for certain others using the (*)
parallel axis theorem. It is calculated by summing or integrating mass
times distance from an axis squared, and rotational kinetic energy is
equal to this quantity times the square of the angular velocity. For
10 points, identify this quantity, the rotational analog of mass,
which often has units of kilograms times meters squared, symbolized I.
Gunter {Grass} In one of this author's works, the narrator is married
to Ilsebill and the title fish is put on trial for helping to
overthrow matriarchal society. This author of The Flounder described
Wolfgang Stremplin being shot by Konny Pokriefke in Crabwalk, while
another of his novels describes a character with a huge Adam's apple;
that character is "The Great (*) Mahlke." This author of Cat and Mouse
wrote a novel about a boy who can shatter glass with his voice and
decides to stop growing at the age of three. That character, Oskar
Matzerath, receives the title instrument for his birthday. For 10
points, name this German author of the Danzig Trilogy and The Tin
Drum. {Iberia}n Peninsula On this peninsula, Mulhacen is the highest
point on the continental portion of one of this peninsula's countries.
That peak is located in the Sierra Nevada Mountains in the southern
portion of this peninsula. Llanito ["Yanito"], a native language mixed
with English, is the vernacular spoken in one territory on this
peninsula. At Valladolid [Vaa-ya-doh-lid] on this peninsula, the
Pisuerga River joins the (*) Duoro which has its mouth at Porto. The
longest and second-longest rivers on this peninsula are the Tagus and
Ebro, respectively. For 10 points, name this large European peninsula
upon which Portugal and Spain are located. Chinese {Cultural
Revolution} During this period an attempt was made to have drivers
stop at green traffic lights. A supposed attempt to overthrow one
leader during this period was called Project 571, while the use of big
character posters began during it. The Down to the Countryside
Movement was initiated during this period in which a group including a
major leader's (*) wife called the Gang of Four gained influence,
though it was defeated by Deng Xiaoping. Roving students named Red
Guards engaged in wanton destruction and academics were frequently
attacked during this period. For 10 points, name this tumultuous
period of purges of capitalist elements in China. {Baha'i} faith One
of this faith's members summarized its principles in the Tablet to the
Hague. A symbol of this religion is the Ringstone. Four goals of this
religion were developed in the Ten Year Crusade, and one of its
leaders eulogized two brothers and attacked a critical cleric in the
Epistle to the Son of the Wolf. This religion's only Guardian was (*)
Shoghi Effendi. Jesus and the Bab were among the Manifestations of God
in this religion whose holy text, the Book of Certitude, was written
by Baha'u'llah. For 10 points, name this Persian religion centered in
the Universal House of Justice in Haifa. {collagen} Synthesis of this
protein is inhibited by a lack of the cofactor vitamin C; this
inhibition results in scurvy. This protein contains the amino acids
hydroxyproline and hydroxylysine, and glycine and proline appear at
regular intervals along its length. It forms a (*) triple-helical
structure and links together to form fibrils. Gelatin is derived from
this protein, and long chains of this protein are found in the
extracellular matrix of animal cells. This tension-bearing protein is
found in connective tissue such as tendons, ligaments and bone. For 10
points, name this protein, the most common in the human body. Things
Fall Apart One character in this novel follows as her daughter is
taken around nine villages by the Oracle of the Hills and the Caves.
This novel ends with one character's neighbors refusing to touch him
after he hangs himself after murdering a messenger. A seven year exile
results from a disruption of the (*) Week of Peace in this novel in
which Ikemefuna is killed by his adopted father. The Reverend Smith
replaces the kinder missionary Mr. Brown in this novel. The
protagonist had in his youth defeated Amalinze the Cat in a wrestling
contest and fears looking lazy and weak like his father. For 10
points, name this novel about Okonkwo by Chinua Achebe. {Punic} Wars
(accept specific wars like First, Second, Third or Mercenary) One of
these conflicts contained the Battle of "The Saw" and the leader
Hanno. Sacred chickens were thrown overboard before the Battle of
Drepana in one of these conflicts, among which the Mercenary War is
counted. A key naval battle at Mylae ["my lie"] was won in the first
of these wars using the corvus ["cohr wus"], and a weak center and (*)
flanking maneuver led to a rout in one battle from one of these wars.
In the second of these wars battles occurred at Lake Trebia and
Trasimene, and Scipio Africanus was victorious at the Battle of Zama.
In that war, the Battle of Cannae was won by Hannibal. For 10 points,
name these wars between Rome and Carthage. {Apple} Inc. Employees of
this company have filed a class-action lawsuit after they had to wait
to have their bags searched during lunch breaks. This company was
accused in a Senate investigation of using the "Double Irish
arrangement" to avoid paying taxes. In July, this company was
convicted of leading a conspiracy to raise prices with HarperCollins
and other (*) publishers. In August, the Obama administration vetoed a
ban on some of this company's products which resulted after a
copyright battle with Samsung. This company contracts with the Foxconn
manufacturing plant in China, and its current CEO is Tim Cook. For 10
points, name this company which offers the iPhone. {Loki} Odin asks
his son Vidar to give up his seat to this figure during a feast in a
work named after this god's "flyting." The horse Svadilfari was unable
to finish building a wall because this figure turned into a mare to
distract him; that adventure led to this figure becoming the father of
Odin's (*) horse, Sleipnir. This figure once lost an eating contest to
fire. This figure is bound by the entrails of his son Narfi to a rock
where a serpent drips poison onto his face as punishment for this
god's hand in the use of mistletoe to kill Balder. For 10 points,
identify this trickster god of Norse mythology. Kurt {Vonnegut}
(accept Bluebeard before "author") The Abstract Expressionist Rabo
Karabekian paints a potato barn as his final work in this author's
Bluebeard. Norman Mushari attempts to obtain some of the title
character's fortune by having him declared insane in this author's God
Bless You, Mr. Rosewater and in another of his books, Malachi Constant
visits (*) Saturn; that work is The Sirens of Titan. The science-
fiction writer Kilgore Trout frequently appears in this writer's
works, and Felix Hoenikker invents ice-nine in this author's book
Cat's Cradle. In this writer's most famous novel, Billy Pilgrim meets
Trafalmadorians and becomes "unstuck in time." For 10 points, name
this author of Slaughterhouse-Five. Joseph {McCarthy} [accept the
{Pepsi Cola Kid}; accept {Tail Gunner Joe}] In a broadcast about this
man, Edward Murrow claimed that a "very fine" line existed between
"investigating and persecuting" This man, who was attacked on See it
Now, ran for Congress with the slogan "Congress needs a tail-gunner."
The Tydings committee rebuked claims this man had made in a speech
given to the Republican Women's Club in (*) Wheeling, West Virginia.
Joseph Welch said that he had "never really gauged [this man's]
cruelty" and asked this man "Have you no sense of decency?" during
hearings between this man and the U.S. Army. For 10 points, name this
Wisconsin senator who claimed to have found 207 members of the
Communist party in the State Department. I {Pagliacci} (accept The
{Clowns} until mentioned) This opera's most famous aria begins
"Recitar! Mentre preso dal deirio", and was famously recorded by
Enrico Caruso. A character in this opera sings "I know you hate me"
while getting whipped. It begins with a baritone telling the audience
that the story they are about to watch is about real people. In a play
within this opera, Nedda becomes (*) Colombina, Tonio becomes Taddeo,
and Canio becomes the title figure. Canio, after stabbing Nedda, ends
this opera by singing "the comedy's over." For 10 points, name this
verismo opera containing "Vesti la giubbia," a Ruggero Leoncavallo
work about some sad clowns. {Frederick II} [accept {Frederick} the
{Great} before mention; prompt on {Frederick}] This man had the Temple
of Friendship built to honor his sister Wilhelmine; that temple was
built in the Sanssouci Park surrounding this leader's summer palace at
Potsdam. This ruler fought the Potato War to prevent Hapsburg control
of Bavaria and he used an oblique order to win the Battle of (*)
Hohenfriedberg. This ruler corresponded with Voltaire and composed
flute sonatas as part of his "enlightened despot" status. This ruler
violated the Pragmatic Sanction in invading Silesia and thus initiated
the War of the Austrian Succession against Maria Theresa. For 10
points, name this militaristic Hohenzollern king of Prussia termed
"the Great". {World War I} or {WWI} (or the {Great War}) This war is
the subject of the poem "Dead Man's Dump," which was written by Isaac
Rosenberg. A line beginning "My subject is War, and the pity of War"
adorns a memorial to people who served in this war like Siegfried
Sassoon. One patriotic poem about it exhorts people to remember "That
there's some (*) corner of a field / That is for ever England." That
poem, "The Soldier," is contrasted with a darker poem which asks "What
passing-bells for these who die as cattle?"; that poem is "Anthem for
Doomed Youth." "Dulce Et Decorum Est" is a poem by Wilfred Owen about,
for 10 points, a poison gas attack in what war? ocean {current}
(accept {gyres} and other specific currents before they are read) The
direction of these entities is explained by the Ekman spiral, in which
they travel at an angle to the frictional forces which form them.
These entities have a "boundary" type, while their circular types are
called gyres. Though they are not winds, these entities are angled by
the (*) Coriolis force. A misnomer for one type of this entity is the
rip tide, while other prominent examples include ones called the
equatorial and the "surface" type. These entities transport energy and
heat as they travel across the globe. The Gulf Stream is an example
of, for 10 points, what directed flows of fluid found in the ocean?
{Psycho} Near the end of this film, the brief flash of a skull
overlays the transition between a scene with a fly crawling over a
hand and a car being dragged out of a swamp. Swirling blood
transitions into an eye in a scene from this film that is accommodated
by (*) piercing strings music. After one character in this film
discovers a mummified body, the antagonist runs in wearing a dress and
a wig in a state of split-personality. Near the end of this film, it
is revealed the antagonist had faked being his own mother. For 10
points, Marion Crane is killed while showering by the motel owner
Norman Bates in what Hitchcock thriller? The History of {Tom Jones}, A
Foundling One character in this novel convinces Nightingale to marry
his love Nancy while rooming with Mrs. Miller. The philosopher Square
and the reverend Thwackum tutor this novel's protagonist along with
his rival and unknown stepbrother Blifil. The protagonist first loves
Black George's daughter Molly Seagrim and then has an affair with Mrs.
Waters, who is revealed to be his supposed mother (*) Jenny Jones, but
it is later revealed that Bridget is in fact his mother. Squire
Allworthy raises the title character, who eventually marries Sophia
Western. For 10 points, name this novel by Henry Fielding about a
foundling. {U}{nited}{S}{tates} of {America} (accept any underlined
portion; accept {US}A; accept {Murrica}) This nation was eliminated by
Argentina in the semifinals of the 1930 World Cup. This country's 1-0
upset win over England in 1950 was due to a goal by Haitian citizen
Joe Gatjens. This squad beat Colombia in 1994 on an own goal from
defender Andres Escobar, who was later gunned down in a nightclub by
some disappointed drug lords. This country's national league was
founded as part of clause in its deal to host the 1994 (*) World Cup.
Its squad was eliminated in the 2006 and 2010 World Cups by Ghana, and
its current coach is Jurgen Klinsmen. Players from this country have
included Jozy Altidore, Brian McBride, and Clint Dempsey. For 10
points name this country who's soccer team hosts international games
in cities like Denver. {gladiator}s (prompt on "slave"s) Examples of
these peoples included "followers" who were often paired with other
examples of these people who carried nets and tridents. Oenomaus and
Crixus were instances of these people. Lanistae ["lah-nis-tie"]
trained these people, and they frequently spoke the phrase "We who are
about to (*) die, salute you." The construction of one location
associated with them was begun by Vespasian, and the followers of one
of these people were crucified on the Appian Way after a failed
revolt. A turned thumb supposedly decided the fate of these people.
Spartacus was an example of, for 10 points, what people who often
fought in the Roman Colosseum? {influenza}virus or {flu} These
causative agents can attach due to interactions between spike proteins
and sialic acid residues on epithelial cells, causing
hemagglutination; the drug oseltamivir inhibits such binding. These
viruses are in the (*) Orthomyxoviridae family and are classified by
the arrangement of hemaglutinin and neuraminidase glycoproteins on
their surfaces. With genomes of eight single-stranded RNA segments,
there are A, B, and C types of these viruses. Including serotypes such
as H5N1 and H1N1, for 10 points, name this group of viruses causing
pandemics such as the "Spanish" and recent "swine" variants. {G}ross
{D}omestic {P}roduct This quantity scales with the square of
employment according to Okun's law, which predicts a namesake "gap" in
this quantity. It can be measured either using the income approach or
the expenditure approach. Transfer payments are not included in
calculating this quantity, because they do not represent (*)
production, and a similarly-named "national" quantity includes net
foreign factor income. Its "net" variant comes from subtracting the
depreciation of capital. The "per capita" type of this quantity
divides it by the population of a country. For 10 points, economic
growth is measured by the change in what quantity that represents the
total economic output of a country's resources? {Catch-22} One
character in this book repeatedly says "Old Aarfy never paid for it"
before murdering a maid. The character Sammy Singer appears in this
novel's sequel Closing Time. The C.I.D. investigate the secret agent
Washington Irving as the result of some false signatures in this book,
which also sees an (*) IBM machine make Major Major a major as a
prank. The world's Egyptian cotton supply is bought by the capitalist
Milo in it, while everyone in the 256th squadron of the Air Force is
forced to constantly fly more deadly air missions. For 10 points, name
this novel by Joseph Heller with a title bureaucratic paradox that
stars Yossarian. Vincent Willem {Van Gogh} This artist included a
portrait titled The Lullaby along with one of the postmaster Joseph
Roulin in his planned decorations for the Yellow House. While being
visited by Paul Gauguin, he was depicted as The Painter of Sunflowers.
One of his paintings showing peasants having a dimly lit dinner is
titled The (*) Potato Eaters, while another of his works prominently
uses red and green and shows yellow lights above a billiards table.
His most famous painting contains a cypress tree in Saint-Rémy-de-
Provence located under swirling stars and the moon. The Night Café is
a work by, for 10 points, what artist of Starry Night? {assassination}
of Archduke Franz {Ferdinand} (accept reasonable equivalents) In the
aftermath of this event, an "ultimatum as had never been written in
modern times" was made that was designed to be rejected. This event
which led to the July Ultimatum was organized by a group led by a man
nicknamed Apis. A bomb was thrown under a car during this event,
injuring 20 people but not killing the (*) intended occupants. This
event was planned by Danilo Ilic, a member of the Black Hand, and was
perpetrated by Gavrilo Princip in Sarajevo, the capital of Serbia. For
10 points, name this event that sparked World War I, in which an heir
to the Austro-Hungarian throne was killed in Sarajevo. A {Doll's
House} (or {Et dukkehjem}) This play's author created an alternate
German ending which he called a "barbaric outrage" in which the
protagonist faints after being made to see her children. One character
in this play uses cards with black crosses to announce his coming
death from tuberculosis of the spine; that character is (*) Dr. Rank.
The protagonist had financed a trip to Italy by borrowing money from
the lover of Ms. Linde and that man, Krogstad, had tried to obtain a
bank position through blackmail. For 10 points, Nora Helmer discovers
her husband's true personality and leaves the title construct in what
play by Henrik Ibsen? {Oxidation} (prompt on "redox" or "reduction-
oxidation"; do not prompt or accept "reduction") A reaction of this
type uses a solution of chromium trioxide to convert an alcohol to a
ketone and is named for Jones. Nitric acid is formed by performing
this type of reaction on ammonia. Manganate and hydrogen peroxide
contain highly electronegative elements and are thus good agents of
this type of reaction. This reaction occurs at the (*) anode of a
voltaic cell, and an example of it is rusting. This reaction occurs to
sodium when a salt is formed because it loses an electron and gains in
the namesake state of this reaction. An increase in charge on an atom
occurs in, for 10 points, what type of reaction contrasted with a
reduction? Georgia Totto {O'Keeffe} One set of works by this artist
shows yellow disks surrounded with orange and red stripes above darker
stripes of green and blue, depicting the evening star. In another
work, a large chunk of the title building is not visible, due to a
painted effect imitating camera glare. In addition to Shelton with
Sunspots, this artist painted the Radiator Building and other New York
scenes. This artist depicted Ranchos Church and numerous (*) cow
skulls during her time in New Mexico. She is better known for her
paintings of Jack-in-the- pulpits, poppies, and cannas. For 10 points,
name this American painter of colorful magnified flowers. {Detroit}
The Saint Anne Catholic Church in this city is the second oldest
continuously operating parish in the United States. That Church is
located in the Richard-Hubbard neighborhood just a block away from the
Ambassador Bridge, which connects this city to (*) Windsor. The white
and black neighborhoods of this city have historically been divided by
the Eight Mile Road. This city lies adjacent to Lake St. Clair and the
city of Dearborn. Wayne State University is situated close to the
interchange between the Ford and Chrysler Freeways in, for 10 points,
what largest Michigan city and home of the American auto industry?
{English Civil} War Attempts to prevent this conflict were
unsuccesfully made by the execution of the Earl of Strafford and the
issue of the Protestation. Factions in this war included the Engagers
and the Levellers, the latter of whom engaged in the Putney debates
during it. During this war, Pride's Purge transformed the (*) Long
Parliament into the Rump Parliament. The New Model Army won at the
Battle of Naseby during this war, whose primary factions were the
Roundheads and Cavaliers. For 10 points, name this conflict in a
namesake country between the Parliamentarians of Oliver Cromwell and
the Royalists of Charles I. {one} As a consequence of Lagrange's
theorem, this is the size and number of all proper subgroups of a
group of prime order. This is the genus of a torus and the number of
points mapped to a given point by a bijection or invertible function,
and when using this many variables, there is no need for a (*) partial
derivative. Equal to the limit as x approaches zero for sine x over x,
it is the maximum value of the sine and cosine functions. Linear
equations have this many solutions, and it is used in multiplicative
identity, meaning its product with a number is that number itself. For
10 points, name this number whose sum with itself is two. {haiku}s by
Matsuo Basho One work written in this form describes a monkey who, in
cold showers, desires a straw coat. Works of this genre by different
authors are compared with commentary in a collection of these works
titled after the child's game The Seashell Game. These works are
descended from renga and collected in travelogues like Record of a
Travel-Worn Satchel and (*) Narrow Road to the Interior. One of these
works describes a frog jumping into a silent pond and was written by
Matsuo Basho. They usually take nature as their subject and involve
three lines. A five-seven-five structure is used in, for 10 points,
what poems typically from Japan? {x-ray}s (or {x-radiation}; accept
{Röntgen ray}s before mention) The Duane-Hunt Law describes the
maximum frequency of this type of radiation that can be produced by
the deceleration of electrons in a process known as bremsstrahlung. It
is the weaker of the types of radiation that undergo Compton
scattering, and the different forms of this radiation are called hard
and soft. While experimenting with a Crookes tube, (*) William Röntgen
discovered this radiation. This type of radiation is more energetic
than UV light but less so than gamma rays. For 10 points, name this
type of radiation often used for its penetrating strength to take
medical pictures of bones. {Thebes} One member of this city kidnapped
Chrysippus while teaching him chariot driving, and this city's walls
were built by playing music to enchant stones. This city's king
Pentheus was ripped to shreds by his mother Agave in a Bacchic frenzy.
Its founder was told to stop where a cow laid down; that founder was
(*) Cadmus. A notable Seven made war against this city, and one king
of this city killed his father Laius at a crossroads. That king's wife
stabbed out her own eyes after discovering she had married her son.
That king answered "man" to a riddle to defeat the Sphinx which had
terrified this city. For 10 points, name this ancient Greek city which
Oedipus ruled. {Spanish-American} War A territory invaded during this
war asked to borrow gunpowder to salute a ship that had come to
conquer it. One island invaded in this war had been overseen by the
"Butcher" Weyler. An admiral in this war stated "You may (*) fire when
you are ready," prior to beginning the Battle of Manila Bay. One
battle in this "splendid little war" saw San Juan Hill charged upon by
the Rough Riders and Teddy Roosevelt. Hearst's and Pulitzer's yellow
journalism as well as the explosion of the USS Maine helped instigate
this war. For 10 points, name this war which led to the capture of the
Philippines, Puerto Rico, and Cuba by the United States. violon{cello}
This instrument is featured along with the piano in "Praise to the
Eternity of Jesus," part of the Quartet for the End of Time. Like a
larger instrument in the same family, this instrument often uses a
wolf tone eliminator. A concerto in E minor for this instrument was
written by Edward Elgar and famously played by (*) Jacqueline du Pre.
Bach wrote six suites for this instrument which plays accompanied by
pianos in the Swan movement of The Carnival of the Animals. Pablo
Casals and Mstislav [MIST-ih-slav] Rostropovich play, for 10 points,
what string instrument which is smaller than a double bass yet larger
than a viola? The {Rime of the Ancient Mariner} One character in this
work says "He prayeth best, who loveth best / All things both great
and small" and ends this work noting he is "a sadder and a wiser man."
The fate of the speaker is gambled over by Death and (*) Life-in-
Death in this work. The speaker despairs that "a thousand thousand
slimy things / Lived on; and so did I" while noting that there is
"water, water, everywhere / nor any a drop to drink" after his ship
strands in calm waters in this poem. The speaker of this poem
interrupts a wedding guest to describe his story. A sailor shoots an
albatross in, for 10 points, what long poem by Samuel Taylor
Coleridge? Søren {Kierkegaard} This thinker engaged in a conflict with
the satirical newspaper The Corsair and he stated that "truth is
subjectivity." This philosopher proposed three stages of life
including the aesthetic and religious, while one of his works contains
the section "The Seducer's Diary." This philosopher examined the (*)
teleological suspension of the ethical which allowed one person to
become a knight of faith rather than infinite resignation; that
example involves Abraham and Isaac. Johannes Climacus and Victor
Eremita are among this thinker's pseudonyms. For 10 points, name this
philosopher of the Danish golden age who wrote Either/Or andFear and
Trembling. {Hardness} The Schmidt hammer is a tool used to measure the
elastic properties of a rock and the surface variety of this property.
The Hall-Petch Relationship governs how this property increases with
decreasing particle size. Because this property is defined for not
elastic materials but solids, it is not (*) stiffness. A sclerometer
measures the scratch variety of this property which is done by
calculating the width of scratch made by a diamond. Feldspar has a
value of 6 and talc has a value of 1 on the Mohs scale for this
property. For 10 points, name this measure of how resistant solid
matter is to changing shape when force is applied. the Epic of
{Gilgamesh} This work opens with a king asserting the "lord's right"
and his people praying for freedom from oppression and the hard labor
of having to build a wall. The protagonist of this work is the son of
the goddess Ninsun, and visits Utnapishtim, who is with his wife the
only survivor of a great (*) Flood. The Bull of Heaven is sent to kill
one character in this work after he spurns the advances of Ishtar.
After the title character's friend the wild-man Enkidu dies in this
epic, that character engages on a journey to find the secret of
immortality. For 10 points, name this Sumerian epic about a King of
Uruk. Ansel {Adams} This artist's books This is the American Earth and
These We Inherit were collaborations with Nancy Newhall. With Fred
Archer, this man developed a system of eleven varying regions of
brightness called the Zone System. One work by this founder of the
group f/64 ["f-stop" 64] shows a white dot high above a town at (*)
sunset, while another depicts a dark sky background to an imposing
stone feature. Those pictures are Hernandez: Moonrise, New Mexcio and
Monolith, The Face of Half Dome. For 10 points, name this photographer
whose pictures of American nature are exemplified by the ones he took
of Yosemite National Park. {Dreyfus} Affair One cartoon of this event
depicted a family fighting after "they have discussed it." The petit
bleu was discovered by Major Picquart while investigating this event;
Picquart was then falsely accused of forgery by the government using
other forgeries. Ferdinand (*) Esterhazy was the true perpetrator of
the espionage causing this scandal. The central figure of this scandal
was imprisoned at Devil's Island and Emile Zola published an open
letter criticizing the government for anti-Semitism during this
scandal titled J'Accuse. For 10 points, the French government
wrongfully imprisoned a Jewish officer for treason in what political
scandal? {parables of Jesus} (accept {parables of Christ}, prompt on
"parables" before Jesus is read, accept afterwards) At the end of one
of these works, an improperly dressed guest is bound and thrown out of
a wedding, and another of these tells of a rich farmer who greedily
plans to build bigger barns to hold his plentiful harvest. One of
these works tells of how some lamp bearers at a wedding brought
sufficient oil while others did not. Thanks is given for the return of
a (*) wasteful child in one of these stories, and another likens the
growth of mustard seed to the Kingdom of Heaven. A man of a certain
ethnicity helps an injured traveler in the one of these about the Good
Samaritan. For 10 points, identify these stories used by Jesus to
convey messages. {xylem} In this tissue, the presence of bordered pits
in the walls of cells prevents the formation of embolisms. The
secondary kind of this tissue is located on the interior of the
vascular cambium and comprises heartwood and sapwood. Transport in
this tissue is partially caused by root pressure, and the secondary
walls of its cells are (*) lignified. Cohesion-tension theory
describes how transpirational pull moves sap through this type of
tissue, which is composed of vessel elements and longer, thinner
tracheids. Cells are dead at maturity in, for 10 points, what water-
transport tissue that is found in plants and contrasted with phloem?
{Jack} One figure with this name is a soldier who captures Death using
a magic sack. A man with this name marries the daughter of the King
after making her laugh and in many stories, that man is helped by an
old man after offering the old man food after others had not. The most
famous man of this name steals a magic harp and a (*) golden goose and
meets a creature who will "grind his bones to make my bread." That man
of this name adventures into the sky and kills some giants that say
"fee-fi-fo-fum" after trading a cow for a magic plant. For 10 points,
give this name of a figure from English and American folklore who
climbs a beanstalk. Pablo {Neruda} (or Neftalí­ Ricardo {Reyes}
Basoalto In one work, this poet calls the addressee a "subtle visitor"
and says "Every day you play with the light of the universe." Gabriela
Mistral mentored this poet who used the phrase "white hills, white
thighs" to describe the "body of a woman" in opening a poetry
collection. One of this author's poems in which he declares "In
everything you sank!" and "It is the hour of departure" follows a poem
opening (*) "Tonight I can write the saddest lines." He included the
section "The Heights of Macchu Picchu" in his longer work Canto
General. For 10 points, name this Chilean poet who wrote Twenty Love
Poems and a Song of Despair. {Orion} This constellation sits atop
Lepus, the rabbit. It contains a young cluster readily identified by
four bright stars, the Trapezium, which is contained in this
constellation's namesake nebula. Its gamma star is colloquially known
as the Amazon Star and is named Bellatrix. Perhaps the most
recognizable astronomical asterism is formed by (*) Altinak, Alninam,
and Mintaka, which run in a straight line through this constellation's
center. Its beta star, Rigel, frequently outshines its alpha star,
which forms the Winter Triangle with Procyon and Sirius. For ten
points, name this constellation, the Hunter, which contains Betelgeuse
and has a namesake belt. Simon {Bolivar} This man survived an
assassination attempt when his servant Pio stabbed a different person
lying in this man's hammock. That attempt occurred in Jamaica, from
where this man wrote a letter explaining his republican principles.
This man issued the (*) Cartagena Manifesto before beginning his
Admirable Campaign. This man, who fought alongside Antonio de Sucre,
met at the Guayaquil Conference with Jose de San Martin. This
president of Gran Colombia fought for the independence of New Granada,
Ecuador, and Venezuela. For 10 points, name this man who was labeled
"El Libertador" of several South American nations. John Maynard
{Keynes} An effect named after this economist describes a situation
when a change in interest rates affects expenditures more than it does
savings. This man who stated "In the long run we're all dead"
disagreed with the decision by the "Heavenly Twins" to impose heavy
war (*) reparations on Germany in the Treaty of Versailles, as
detailed in his book The Economic Consequences of the Peace. His
namesake cross depicts aggregate demand and aggregate supply. This
economist advised deficit spending during the Great Depression. For 10
points, name this British economist, the author of The General Theory
of Employment, Interest, and Money. {Whig} This party was supported by
the Log Cabin newspaper. In Massachusetts, Abbot Lawrence led this
group's "Cotton" faction, which opposed the Charles Francis Adams led
"Conscience" faction. Horace Greeley originally belonged to this
party, whose founder proposed subsidies for roads and tariffs to
protect industries as part of his (*) American System. Its only two
elected presidents both died in office; those were William Henry
Harrison and Zachary Taylor. For 10 points, name this antebellum
political party that was led by Henry Clay, who formed in opposition
of Andrew Jackson's Democrats. {B}ashar al-{Assad} (prompt on just
Assad before "Hafez" is read; accept afterwards) This man's wife was
the subject of a highly criticized Vogue article titled "A Rose in the
Desert." The Houla massacre was carried out by this man's forces,
which include the "outsourced" Shabiha, who allegedly beat Ali Farzat
for his cartoons of this man. Like his father Hafez, he is a member of
the Alawite sect of Shia Islam as well as the ruling (*) Ba'ath party.
Lakhdar Brahimi and Kofi Annan have served as UN envoys to this
leader's country. Forces of this man engaged in the shelling of Homs
against an opposition also fighting in cities like Aleppo and
Damascus. For 10 points, an insurgency has been taking place against
the government of what President of Syria? {speed of sound} (accept
{Mach one} before mentioned) For an ideal gas, this quantity equals
the square root of the adiabatic index times the gas constant times
temperature over molar mass, a result which can be derived from a more
general formula equating it to the square root of the bulk modulus
over the density. For air, this quantity varies based on humidity and
temperature. An object (*) exceeding this quantity will cause the
formation of a cone of condensation due to the formation of a shock
wave, which is also accompanied by a loud boom. For 10 points,
identify this speed equal to Mach one, the rate at which phenomena
such as thunder and voices propagate through a medium. House of
{Hanover} One ruler from this dynasty cohabited with the actress
Dorothea Jordan and was known as the Sailor King. Troops serving under
a monarch from this family defeated the Jacobites at Glen Shiel. That
man ascended to the throne due to the Act of Settlement. At the Battle
of Dettingen, a king of this house became the last to (*) personally
lead British troops into battle. This house was succeeded by Edward
VII of the House of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha, and had succeeded the House of
Stuart. One man from this house suffered from porphyria and was king
during the American Revolution. For 10 points, George III was from
what British royal house based in Germany? {One Day in the Life of
Ivan Denisovich} (or {Odin den' Ivana Denisovicha}{)} The protagonist
of this work borrows tobacco from two Estonians who do everything
together. After failing to let Tyurin cover for him, the Captain
naively ends up in the hole in this book while the disgusting Fetyukov
constantly scrounges for cigarette butts and food. The protagonist of
this novel has a religious discussion with the (*) Baptist Alyoshka
and works on building a wall in sub-zero weather conditions. The main
characters of this novel are referred to in slang as zeks and work as
part of the 104th in the gulag system. Alexander Solzhenitsyn wrote,
for 10 points, what novel about a single day for Shukhov inside a
Soviet labor camp? {Rigoletto} In this opera's first scene, the main
character mocks Count Ceprano while his boss seduces Ceprano's wife. A
character sings "Caro nome" after meeting a character she believes to
be Gaultier Malde, and this opera begins with the singing of "Questa o
quella" or "This woman or that." At an Inn, the aria (*) "La donna e
mobile" is sung in this opera by the Duke of Mantua about how fickle
women are. The title character's daughter, Gilda, sacrifices herself
in this opera to save the Duke's life from hitmen hired by her father,
who fears a curse enacted by a royal courtier. For 10 points, name
this Verdi opera about an angry hunchbacked jester. Thomas {Hardy} In
a work by this author, Jopp humiliates Lucetta by reading her love
letters to a crowd. In that novel, after he sells his wife Susan to
the sailor Newson in a fit of drunkenness, the protagonist swears off
drinking. In another novel, a note reading "Done because we are too
menny" is left behind after Little Father Time commits suicide. In
addition to creating Michael Henchard and (*) Jude Fawley, this author
created a character who murders Alec and is executed after being
caught with Angel Claire. For 10 points, name this author of The Mayor
Of Casterbridge, Jude the Obscure, and Tess of the d'Urbervilles.
{stem} cells A pulse chase can be used to show that these cells lay at
the bottom of crypts between intestinal villi. The iPS type of these
cells can be made by adding transcription factors to epithelial cells.
Till and McCullough showed that the hematopoietic type of these cells,
which are found in the bone marrow, are capable of (*) regenerating a
mouse's immune system. An early fertilized egg is the only natural
source of the totipotent type of these cells. Donor DNA was inserted
in an enucleated embryonic one of these cells in order to form Dolly
the Sheep. For 10 points, identify these cells, which have the ability
to both regenerate and differentiate. {mitochondrion} or
{mitochondria} Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy is caused by a
problem in this organelle, which has also been suggested as a possible
cause of aging. This organelle transfers substances across its inner
membrane through a TIM/TOM complex, and it is thought to have
developed from (*) proteobacteria according to the endosymbiotic
theory. This double-membraned organelle self-replicates during mitosis
and meiosis and contains its own DNA, RNA, and ribosomes. The electron
transport chain is embedded in the cristae of this organelle, and the
Krebs cycle occurs in its matrix. This "cellular power-house" is, for
10 points, what organelle that produces ATP via cellular respiration?
{Nighthawks} George Helnwein parodied this painting in his Boulevard
of Broken Dreams by replacing its central figures with Marilyn Monroe
and others. A building in this painting has windows with half-drawn
blinds, while another building has a yellow door but no evident exit.
This painting contains an (*) advertisement for 5-cent Phillie's
cigars as well as two coffee canisters and a man in white bending
down. This painting by the artist of Automat and Chop Suey features a
woman in a red dress sitting with two men in fedoras at a triangular
counter. For 10 points, name this painting of lonely patrons at a
nighttime diner by Edward Hopper. A {Clockwork Orange} The protagonist
of this work frequently uses the phrases "Oh my brothers" and "Your
humble narrator." The title phrase of this book means an attempt to
mechanically control something organic and appears in a manuscript
written by F. Alexander. Music by "lovely Ludwig van" is played during
the (*) Ludovico technique in this work, which puts the protagonist at
the mercy of a writer who he had committed ultraviolence on. The
protagonist of this work visits the Korova Milk Bar with his droogs
and speaks nadsat. For 10 points, name this book with the violent
teenage protagonist Alex written by Anthony Burgess. Jean {Piaget}
This man worked with Bärbel Inhelder to perform an experiment in which
subjects were shown a 3D view of a mountain. This psychologist posited
that people underwent accommodation or assimilation to adapt new
information about the world into an existing schema. This psychologist
identified the ability to realize an object was still there even after
its (*) removal from sight; he found that that ability, object
permanence, was not present in those less than two years old.
Preoperational and sensorimotor are among the stages of this man's
theory of cognitive development for children. For 10 points, name this
Swiss psychologist. Flannery {O'Connor} This person wrote a short
story in which the bible seller Manly Pointer steals Joy Hopewell's
prosthetic leg. In one book by this author of "Good Country People,"
the protagonist blinds himself with lye and founds the Holy Church of
Christ Without Christ; Hazel Motes is the protagonist of that novel,
(*) Wise Blood. Julian's mother dies after riding an integrated bus to
the YMCA in this writer's story "Everything that Rises Must Converge,"
and in another of this woman's stories a grandmother and her family
are murdered by the Misfit. For 10 points, name this Southern Gothic
author of "A Good Man is Hard to Find." {Plato} One of this thinker's
works examines whether poetic recitation is based on skill using a
discussion about Ion. This philosopher compared a chariot driven by
two different horses to the soul. In one of his works, several
philosophers discuss the nature of love, while another explains a
model of the world using the (*) analogy of the divided line. This
author of Symposium described the concept of philosopher-kings in a
work in which he relates the story of a man stepping into the light
for the first time, his "Allegory of the Cave." For 10 points, name
this author of The Republic, a Greek philosopher who was a student of
Socrates. Michaelangelo Merisi de {Caravaggio} (or {Michaelangelo
Merisi}; do not accept only "Michaelangelo") One painting by this
artist depicts the artist himself holding a lantern, along with a
figure fleeing from soldiers. Another work by this man depicts two
figures playing cards, though one figure has a hidden dagger behind
his back. Peaches, grapes, and apples are depicted in his Boy With a
Basket of Fruit. One work by this artist of (*) Cardsharps shows the
newly resurrected Jesus revealing himself during the title meal, while
another shows Jesus pointing to the title figure, who is surrounded by
tax-collectors. For 10 points, name this Baroque Italian artist of
Supper at Emmaus and The Calling of St. Matthew. Republic of {Poland}
[prompt on "General Government" during the second sentence] While in
this country, Willy Brandt spontaneously knelt down and cried in front
of a memorial in the Warschauer Kniefall. Marek Edelmann was the only
surviving commander of an uprising in this country that was put down
by Jurgen Stroop. The thirteenth of Wilson's Fourteen Points called
for the (*) creation of this country. The first independent trade
union in the Soviet Union began in this country's Gdansk shipyards.
This country's second president was an electrician who had led the
Solidarity movement. This birth country of John Paul II was led by
Lech Walesa [vah-WEN-sah]. For 10 points, name this country in which
the Warsaw Ghetto uprising occurred. {Ferris Bueller's Day Off} A
deleted scene from this movie sees the protagonist order pancreas
while posing as Abe Froman to eat in a restaurant. One character in
this movie dances to "Twist and Shout" during a parade. Charlie Sheen
plays a drug addict in this movie who makes out with the protagonist's
sister Jeanie. A teacher in this school lectures on the (*) Hawley-
Smoot tariff and calls out one character's name several times while
taking attendance. A parking valet takes a Ferrari for a joyride in
this movie. Matthew Broderick play the title character who is pursued
by Principal Ed Rooney as he hangs out with Cameron and Sloane. For 10
points, name this film about the title character who pretends to be
sick to play hookey. Maurice {Ravel} He's not Franz Schubert, but this
composer wrote a suite of Valses nobles et sentimentales, while
another of his pieces features movements such as "Scarbo" and
"Ondine." That work was intended to be more difficult than Mily
Balakirev's Islamey and is titled Gaspard de la nuit. By request of
Paul (*) Wittgenstein, this man wrote the Piano Concerto in D for the
Left Hand. Among this man's ballets are Daphnis et Chloé. His most
famous work originated from a commission by Ida Rubinstein and
features an ostinato in which snare drums play repetitively; that work
is named after a Spanish dance. For 10 points, identify this French
composer of Bolero. Franz {Kafka} One of this man's books opens with a
boy meeting his uncle Senator Jakob and a stoker on a ship. This
writer described Georg Bendemann jumping off a bridge after being
condemned to drown by his father in the story "The Judgement," and in
another story, the Officer displays a (*) machine that carves
prisoner's sentences on their backs. In addition to "In the Penal
Colony," this author wrote a book in which a man dies "like a dog"
after being arrested for no reason, while in another of his books a
salesman turns into a cockroach. For 10 points, name this German
writer who created Joseph K. The Trial and Gregor Samsa in The
Metamorphosis. {waves} (accept electromagnetic {waves} before "nodes"
is read) The equation governing these phenomena can usually be written
as the d'Alembertian of a field being equal to zero, and "packets" of
these phenomena obey the Fourier uncertainty principle. In dispersive
media, their phase and group velocities may differ, and in moving
media they undergo the (*) Doppler effect. Nodes and antinodes are
seen in their "standing" variety, and depending on their mode of
propagation, they may be longitudinal or transverse. Traveling ones
move at a speed equal to the product of their namesake length and
their frequency. For 10 points, name these phenomena, such as light or
sound. {Black} Sea The western shore of this large body of water
contains the resorts of Burgas and Varna. The river upon which the
Iron Gate lies empties into this body of water into which the Dniester
and Dnieper Rivers flow. Abkhazia, a territory at the center of the
2008 South Ossetia War, is located on the eastern boundary of this
sea. Cesium-137 radionuclides from the Pripyat River eventually find
their way in this massive (*) sea. The home of the 2014 Winter
Olympics, Sochi, is on this sea which is connected to the
Mediterranean via the Bosphorus and Dardanelles. For 10 points, name
this large sea located north of Turkey into which the Danube flows.
The {Handmaid's Tale} One character in this work contracts scurvy in
order to escape the Red Center, which is led by Aunt Lydia. The
protagonist of this work visits the Wall, where bodies are often hung,
and an epilogue to this work sees Professor Pieixoto deliver a
lecture. The protagonist has an affair with the chauffeur (*) Nick in
this book and illegally engages in intellectual pursuits like
Scrabble. This novel's protagonist lives in the Republic of Gilead and
is employed by the Commander in the title baby making position. For 10
points, Offred lives in an anti-feminist dystopia in what book by
Margaret Atwood? {dog} or {canine} or {hound} (or other reasonable
equivalents) To resolve a paradox, one of these creatures was along
with the Teumissian Fox turned to stone; that creature was named
Laelaps. Eurytion owned a monstrous one of these animals which helped
guard the cattle of Geryon and was killed by Heracles. The lower body
of Scylla was made of these animals. One of these animals named (*)
Argos died of old age upon finally seeing Odysseus again, while
several of these attacked Actaeon after he was transformed by Artemis
into a hind for spying her bathing while hunting. For 10 points, name
this animal of which the three-headed guardian of the underworld
Cerberus is an example. {John} Lackland [do not accept or prompt on
"John I"] The family of de Lusignan revolted against this man after he
wed Isabella of Angouleme ["den-goo-lem"]. This king fought against
his nephew Arthur in the Battle of Mirebeau, along with a man with
whom he signed the Treaty of Le Goulet, Phillip II Augustus. Sometimes
called "Softsword," this king lost control of (*) Normandy after his
allies lost the Battle of Bouvines. This king fought the First Barons'
War after refusing to abide by an agreement that he signed at
Runnymede in 1215 with some nobles. For 10 points, name this king also
called "Lackland" who limited his power by signing the Magna Carta.
{Chinese}-American (the first author mentioned is David Henry Hwang) A
play by an author of this descent describes a French civil servant who
discovers the opera singer he loves is actually a man; that play is M.
Butterfly. One character of this ethnicity is Pearl Louie Brandt, who
is the creation of an author who described the chess champion Waverly
in another book. The (*) Kitchen God's Wife is a work of an author of
this ethnicity, who described a daughter who takes her mother's place
playing a game after she dies. That San Francisco-set work is centered
around mahjong. For 10 points, name this native ethnicity of the
author of The Joy Luck Club, Amy Tan, as well as the Tiger Mother.
{Cyrus II} or {Cyrus the Great} (prompt on Cyrus) A Rommulus and Remus
style legend about this man tells that he was saved by the steward
Harpagus, who would later help him overthrow his grandfather Astyages.
This ruler used camels to win the Battle of Thymbra over (*) Croesus
of Lydia. The earliest known declaration of human rights was issued
after he freed the Jews with the Edict of Restoration and captured
Babylon; that was his namesake "Cylinder." His first conquest was of
Ecbatana when he destroyed the Median Empire, and his capital was at
Pasargadae. This ruler used the satrap system to govern his
territories. For 10 points, name this ruler who founded the Achaemenid
Persian Empire. {Mughal} Empire One ruler of this empire resided with
Tahmasp I after being defeated by the Sur Empire. This empire fought
the War of 27 Years against the Maratha Empire. Military officers in
this empire were called mansabdars. This empire was founded after the
defeat of Ibrahim Lodi at the First Battle of (*) Panipat. Mumtaz was
one queen of this empire that long held its capital at Agra. Bahadur
Shah II was the last emperor of this empire, whose jizya tax was
reinstated by Aurangzeb. The building of the Taj Mahal was
accomplished by this empire. Shah Jahan, Babur, and Akbar the Great
were, for 10 points, emperors of what Indian empire? Modern {Greek}
(accept Ancient {Greek} when buzzing after "journeys" is read) One
poem written in this language ends "Those people were a kind of
solution”; that poem is "Waiting for the Barbarians" and was written
by Constantin Cavafy. Another writer wrote a novel in this non-
Portugese language from the perspective of Jesus titled The Last
Temptation; that author also created a character using this language
who seduces (*) Madame Hortense and meets the narrator as he travels
to a lignite mine; that character, Zorba, was created by Nikos
Kazantzakis. The protagonist journeys home to his wife Penelope in an
epic using this language's ancient form. For 10 points, name this
modern version of a language used to write The Odyssey by Homer.
{Mexico City} or {Ciudad de Mexico} This city's borough of Milpa Alta
borders a state with the same name as the country in which it is
located. The Cumbres del Ajusco National Park, located near this city,
contains the source of the Lerma River which flows into Lake Chapala.
The Paseo de la Reforma is a wide boulevard in this city and was
modeled after the Champs-Elysees. In 1824, this city beat out (*)
Queretaro to become the capital of the nation in which it is located.
This city lies in the bed of the former Lake Texcoco upon which
Tenochtitlan was established. For 10 points, name this capital of
America's southern neighbor. film {noir} (prompt on "detective" or
"crime" before they are read) One film in this artistic genre ends
with the narration "There are eight million stories in [a certain]
city. This has been one of them." Another film in this genre ends with
Anna ignoring Martins as a zither theme plays. This genre of The Naked
City and The Third Man also includes (*) Double Indemnity and several
films of its "neo" variety. Hallmarks of this genre include the femme-
fatale and hardboiled detective, due to its common focus on crime
stories. This genre often used shadowy lighting and black and white.
For 10 points, name this genre popular during the 40s and early 50s
that derives its name from the French for "black film". {halogen}
(prompt on "group 17" or "group VII") In the Friedel-Crafts reaction,
one member of this group bonded to an alkyl group can be used to
attach the alkyl group to an aromatic ring. One of these elements was
bonded to xenon to form the first noble gas compound. One member of
this group is the rarest non-transuranium element. An acid formed by
bonding one of these elements to hydrogen can dissolve (*) glass, and
is the only such acid of this group that is weak. This group contains
the only nonmetal that is liquid at standard temperature, and each of
its members contains seven valence electrons, making them extremely
reactive. For 10 points, group 17 consists of which elements that
include chlorine? Battle of {Saratoga} (or Battle of {Bemis Heights}
or {Freeman's Farm} before mentioned) The losing side's plan for this
battle included an advance by Barry St. Ledger up the Mohawk River
Valley, which was defeated by the Green Mountain Boys at Bennington. A
diversion during this battle was led by General Clinton on Fort
Clinton and Fort Montgomery. Timothy Murphy, a sniper at this battle,
killed General Simon (*) Fraser, while serving under Daniel Morgan at
Bemis Heights. Fighting there during this battle followed earlier
fighting at Freeman's Farm where Benedict Arnold was wounded while
leading American forces. For 10 points, what battle ended with General
Burgoyne surrender to Horatio Gates and caused France to enter the
American Revolutionary War? {Amaterasu} This figure's grandson gave
his sons a magic fishhook and bow and was sent to earth by this figure
with three gifts including a mirror, jewel, and sword to plant rice.
This goddess became angry at her brother for killing a goddess of food
and so refused to ever look at him again. She is venerated at the Ise
Grand Shrine, and her parents are (*) Izanagi and Izanami. This
goddess looked into a mirror after she was lured out of a cave by the
dancing of another goddess; she had hid there after a flayed horse was
thrown at her by her brother Susanoo. For 10 points, name this chief
Shinto sun goddess of Japanese mythology. {article}s (prompt on
"adjectives" before mention) In X-bar theory, this class of words,
along with determiners and quantifiers, fills the determining phrase
in a specifier slot. The negative variety of these words was argued by
Noam Chomsky to be neither definite or indefinite. The closest to this
word's partitive variety in English is the word (*) "some." These
words were likely not present in Proto-Indo-European, explaining their
lack of presence in Latin and Russian. These special adjectives define
the type of reference to a noun in English. The prefix "al-" is an
example of it in Arabic. For 10 points, name these words, the three
most common in English being "a," "an," and "the." {graph}s
Mathematically, these entities have a chromatic number, and they are
operated on by the Floyd-Warshall algorithm. The recursive "flood
fill" algorithm can be used to determine the number of their connected
components, and if they are connected and acyclic, they are called
trees. The shortest path along one can be determined using (*)
Djikstra's [jike-struh’s] algorithm, and they can be represented using
adjacency matrices or adjacency lists, which list for each vertex the
vertices they are connected to. For 10 points, give these constructs,
sets of points with edges between them, which some people may draw
with x or y axes. The {Scarlet Letter} In this novel, the protagonist
has an encounter with John Wilson while delivering a pair of gloves.
Governor Bellingham is distressed when a child fails to name God as
her creator; that same child refuses to let her father kiss her when
they meet by a brook. A key scene in this novel has the protagonist
join a man standing upon a (*) scaffold. Robert Chillingworth had
earlier been married to the protagonist of this book, who falls in
love with the Reverend Dimmesdale. Because of that affair, Hester
Prynne is forced to wear the title item upon her breast in, for 10
points, what novel by Nathaniel Hawthorne? John {Coltrane} This man,
the drummer Elvin Jones, the bassist Jimmy Garrison, and the pianist
McCoy Tyner formed the Classic Quartet. The bassist Paul Chambers
inspired this musician's song "Mr. P.C." Chromatic thirds are used in
this musician's namesake "changes," and he recorded a four-part (*)
spiritual suite that includes the tracks "Psalm" and
"Acknowledgement." One of this artist's albums contains the songs
"Naima" and "Countdown," while another is titled after a song from The
Sound of Music. For 10 points, name this musician behind the albums My
Favorite Things, Giant Steps, and A Love Supreme, a tenor saxophonist.
Martin {Luther} This man at times opposed the Cardinal Cajetan,
Andreas Karlstadt, and Thomas Muntzer, the last of whom he criticized
for leading the excessively violent Peasant's War. Along with Ulrich
Zwingli, this man attended the Marburg Colloquy. Earlier, this man
apocryphally said "Here I stand; I can do no other." That announcement
came at the Diet of (*) Worms, which was called when this man refused
to recant his beliefs, which included a criticism of Johann Tetzel,
who sold indulgences. This man espoused justification by faith alone
in a work he nailed to a church door, the 95 Theses. For 10 points,
name this German monk who sparked the Protestant Reformation. {China}
(accept {Taiwan}, I suppose) One holiday from this country began after
a poet drowned himself in a river and involves the eating of a food
bound in leaves and wrapped with string. The graves of ancestors are
visited in early April during the Clear and Bright Festival of this
country. This country often employs lanterns and the color (*) red in
its celebrations. Cakes named after a celestial body are eaten during
lunar holidays of this country from which dragon boat races originate.
This country's most prominent holiday involves the giving out of red
bags of money. That holiday is the New Year of, for 10 points, what
country with a twelve animal zodiac? {red blood cells} or
{erythrocytes} The direct Coombs test looks for the presence of
antibodies on these cells, and one disease associated with these cells
comes in aplastic and pernicious forms. One protein in these cells
undergoes the Bohr shift in response to carbon dioxide concentrations,
and these cells develop from (*) normoblasts. In one disease, these
cells assume an abnormal shape due to valine replacing glutamic acid
in a certain protein. These cells can have Rh factors and A and B
antibodies on their surface, and low counts of them are called
anemias. For 10 points, name these biconcave cells which lack nuclei,
contain hemoglobin and carry oxygen throughout the body. Alexander
{Pushkin} One of this author's stories describing a dream about the
revived corpses of the customers of Prokhorov, the title "Undertaker,"
was supposedly told to Ivan Belkin. A slave ancestor of this author
was the basis for his novel Peter the Great's Negro, while in another
of his stories Evgenii is chased by a (*) statue of Peter the Great.
This author of The Bronze Horseman wrote about a Tsar whose death
begins the Time of Troubles in the play Boris Godunov, and in another
work described the rejection of Tatyana. In that verse novel, Lensky
is killed by the title character in a duel. For 10 points, name this
author of Eugene Onegin. {Ramesses II} or {Ramesses the Great} (prompt
on "Ramesses"; accept {Ozymandias} before it is read; accept "Ramses"
in place of "Ramesses") Among this man's military campaigns were an
expedition with his son Amun- her-khepeshef into Syria and battles
with the Sherden sea pirates. With Hattusili III, this son of Seti I
signed the oldest extant written peace treaty after having earlier
fought a battle with Hattusili's predecessor Muwatalli II near the
Orontes River. This man constructed the massive rock (*) temples of
Abu Simbel for himself and his wife Nefertari. With the Hittites, this
ruler engaged in the largest chariot battle in history. For 10 points,
name this New Kingdom pharaoh sometimes called Ozymandias who won the
Battle of Kadesh. {Florence} (or {Firenze}) This city's most famous
art gallery is located at the Piazza della Signoria, where the Palazzo
Vecchio is also located. A fresco located in the Brancacci Chapel in
this city was painted by Masaccio and shows Peter retrieving a coin
from a fish's mouth. This site of The Tribute Money and the (*) Uffizi
Gallery was the home of an artist who decorated the Arena Chapel; that
man was Giotto. The bronze doors of a Baptistery in this city were
designed by Ghiberti, who lost a competition to engineer a dome for
another building in it. Brunelleschi designed, for 10 points, a
notable Cathedral in what Italian city? {Waiting for Godot} (or {En
Attendant Godot}) One character in this play orders another to
precisely place a stool. One character in this play struggles to
remove his boots at the play's opening as another examines his hat. At
the end of this play, the characters resolve to leave but do not move.
Characters in this play say "quaquaquaqua" and "nothing to be done."
This play's scenery contains a single (*) tree, and at one point Pozzo
enters while leading Lucky on a leash. The title character never
appears, despite Estragon and Vladimir performing the title action for
two days. For 10 points, name this absurdist "tragicomedy in two acts"
by Samuel Beckett. {van der Waals} force [accept {van der Waals}
interaction] Potential energy due to these forces is often modeled as
proportional to the inverse sixth power of distance, and a subtype
whose strength depends on polarizability and dipole moment is
sometimes named for Debye. Another subtype accounts for the higher
boiling points of straight molecules compared to spherical molecules
with an equal number of electrons and for the ability of (*) geckos to
climb glass surfaces; those induced dipole-induced dipole forces are
also known as London dispersion forces. For 10 points, identify this
type of intermolecular force, weaker than covalent, ionic, and
hydrogen bonds, named for a Dutch scientist. {Theseus} This man died
when Lycomedes pushed him off a cliff. Though he is not Paris, he
abducted Helen with the help of his friend Pirithous, who was stuck
with him to the Seat of Oblivion in the underworld until Heracles
rescued this figure by ripping his thighs off a chair. This man pushed
(*) Sciron into a chasm with a turtle. This figure used a pine tree to
kill Sinis, and he killed a man who fit people to beds, the bandit
Procrustes. This man's father Aegeus killed himself after this man
failed to lower black sails after performing his most famous action
with the help of Ariadne. For 10 points, name this Athenian king who
killed the Minotaur. {equilibrium} constant (or {K,} {Keq}, {Ksp},
{Kc}, {Kp}, {Ka}, or {Kb} before K is read) The derivative of the
natural log of this quantity with respect to time is equal to the
enthalpy change over R times T squared, according to the Van't Hoff
equation. A constant calculated in the same method as this one is Q,
the reaction quotient, and (*) pure and inert substances do not affect
its calculation. This constant has forms named for the solubility
product and acid dissociation, and it can be calculated using the
concentrations of the reactants and products. The state at which the
rates of the forward and backwards reactions are equal is represented
by, for 10 points, what constant symbolized capital K? {Lemuel}
{Gulliver} [accept both or either] This character meets Lord Munodi,
who is criticized despite his successful agricultural techniques and
tells this character to visit an academy where things like how to
extract sunbeams from cucumbers are studied. A tale is told to this
man about the war between the Little and Big (*) Endians on the proper
way to crack an egg. This man meets a race of intelligent horses
called the Houyhnhms ["WHO"-ih-NYMS] who consider the human-like
Yahoos barbarous. In this man's first adventure, he finds himself a
giant among the six inch tall Lilliputians. For 10 points, name this
creation of Jonathan Swift who goes on some travels. {Great Fire of
London} [prompt on "Great Fire" before London is read; accept {Great
Fire} after "London" is read; accept {Great Fire} of{1666}] An
inscription claiming this event was caused by "the sin of Gluttony"
adorns a statue of a Golden Boy, while a 200 foot tall column is
another monument to this event. Exacerbated by the inaction of Thomas
Bloodworth, this event began at an establishment owned by Thomas
Farriner. Described in the diary of Samuel (*) ["peeps"] Pepys, this
event nearly destroyed Whitehall. After this event, St. Paul's
Cathedral was rebuilt by Christopher Wren. A baker's residence on
Pudding Lane was the starting point for this natural disaster. For 10
points, what 1666 event laid waste to London during the reign of
Charles II? Fyodor {Dostoyevsky} This author wrote a novel about a
man's addiction to roulette and another one in which the suicidal
Kirilov is willing to take the blame for the murder of Shatov. Along
with writing The Gambler and Demons, this author described how
Nastassya and Aglaya must be chosen between by the (*) epileptic
Prince Myshkin. This author created the illegitimate Smyerdakov and
the faithful Alyosha in a novel in which Dmtri is arrested for
patricide. In another novel by this author, Sonya urges a character to
confess to killing a pawnbroker. For 10 points, name this Russian
author of The Idiot, The Brothers Karamazov, and a novel about
Raskolnikov, Crime and Punishment. Saint {Augustine} of Hippo In old
age this philosopher reviewed his writings and pointed out what he no
longer agreed with in a work titled Reconsiderations. In one work, he
describes the superiority of the soul over the body. This author of
The Measure of the Soul wrote that Christianity had not led to the
fall of (*) Rome in another work. This philosopher relates how his
sinful friends lead him to steal some pears in a work in which he also
converts from Manichaeism to the Christianity of his mother Monica.
City of God is a work by, for 10 points, what early Christian
philosopher and theologian who wrote Confessions, a saint from Hippo?
{Stanford prison} experiment One person in this event named "The
Sarge" performed his duties with military like efficiency. The BBC
reproduced this event with Alex Haslam and Steve Reicher on the
documentary The Experiment. This experiment's conductor discussed it
in his book The Lucifer Effect and explained it in relevance to Abu
Ghraib. (*) Christina Maslach objected to this experiment, causing it
to end after only six days, and number 8612 began to "go crazy" during
this experiment and had to be released. Half of the participants were
made guards and ended up abusing the inmates in, for 10 points, what
experiment conducted by Philip Zimbardo at a California university?
{Dark Knight Rises} One character in this movie relates his fantasy of
casually seeing his employer at a cafe. This movie opens with a plane
latching onto another plane in order to kidnap a nuclear scientist who
helps alter a nuclear generator built at the suggestion of Miranda
Tate. A daughter of a mercenary in this movie climbs out of the (*)
Pit where the protagonist is incarcerated after the protagonist’s back
is broken by a villain whose voice is obscured by a mask. Allies of
the protagonist of this movie include a detective who succeeds him and
a cat burglar. John Blake, Bane, and Catwoman appear in, for 10
points, what third Batman movie directed by Christopher Nolan?
{Titian} [accept Tiziano {Vecelli}o] This man painted a satyr hanging
from a tree with his panpipes, while in another of his works, cherubs
sit atop a black cloud while Saint Peter sits below next to the Virgin
Mary. This artist of The Flaying of Marsyas and The Pesaro Madonna
painted (*) cheetahs drawing Bacchus's chariot as he leaps out to
protect Ariadne. This artist painted Cupid reaching into a sarcophagus
while a bride in white sits opposite Venus in his Sacred and Profane
Love. His most famous work shows a dog sleeping on a white sheet
beside the title goddess. For 10 points, what Renaissance artist
depicted Venus lying on her side in Venus of Urbino? Dylan {Thomas}
This man opened one of his works with the line "And death shall have
no dominion." This poet wrote a radio play set in Llareggub titled
Under Milk Wood. Another of this man's poems ends "Though I sang in my
chains like the sea" and opens "Now as I was young and easy under the
apple boughs." This author of (*) "Fern Hill" wrote of "wild men who
caught and sang the sun in flight" and tells "Old age should burn and
rave at close of day" in a villanelle written for his dying father.
For 10 points, name this poet who told his father to "rage, rage
against the dying of the light" in "Do not go gentle into that good
night." {capacitor} These devices are used with resistors in high-pass
filters, because unlike a complementary device, they do not allow
persistent DC current. Their namesake quantity is usually proportional
to the permittivity, and although it decreases in series, it is added
when they are placed in parallel. These devices possess a breakdown
voltage which can be increased by strengthening the (*) dielectric.
The namesake property of these devices is equal to the charge over the
voltage and is measured in farads. An early example of these devices
was the Leyden jar, while a common version consists of two parallel
plates. For 10 points, name these devices which store charge.
{Newton's Second} Law (prompt on "Newton's laws" of motion) In special
relativity, this equation is modified by multiplying by gamma or gamma
cubed, depending on whether two vectors are perpendicular or parallel.
Adding a term including the change in mass with respect to time, or
the thrust, to this law produces the rocket equation. A (*) free body
diagram can be used to examine all the components involved in this
law. The rotational analogue of this law equates the torque to the
product of the moment of inertia and the angular acceleration. Its
original form equates the time derivative of momentum to force, but
one side is most often given in terms of acceleration. For 10 points,
name this law of motion which states F equals m times a. {Qing}
dynasty [pronounced "Ching"; do not accept Qin, which is pronounced
"Chin," and ask players to spell if necessary] One official in this
dynasty may have risen to power after the emperor believed that
official was the reincarnation of a concubine. That incredibly corrupt
official was Heshen and rose to power during the reign of the Qianlong
emperor. A ponytail called the queue was made compulsory during this
dynasty that saw the Hundred Days' Reform suppressed. When a rebellion
during this dynasty threatened the (*) Legation Quarter, an Eight
Nation Alliance put it down. This dynasty's last emperor Puyi was
installed by the Empress Dowager Cixi. Wars over a namesake drug
erupted during this dynasty. The Opium Wars broke out during, for 10
points, what Manchu last dynasty of China? {San Francisco Bay} ("Bay"
not needed after it's read) This body of water is bounded to the
northwest by Marin County. The Dumbarton Bridge spans this body of
water which contains Yerba Buena Island and the artificial Treasure
Island. The Cosco Busan collided with one of the more famous bridges
spanning this body of water in 2007, causing a small oil spill. That
bridge's eastern span partially collapsed in the (*) Loma Prieta
Earthquake. The O. Co Coliseum lies on its shore near Alameda Island,
a large island in the eastern portion of this bay, while Alcatraz and
Angel Islands lie in the western portion. For 10 points, name this
northern California bay spanned by the Golden Gate Bridge. Frank Lloyd
{Wright} This architect placed a loggia in a building he designed for
a Unitarian Universalist community in Oak Park, Illinois. This
architect of the Unity Temple included a carport in his Rosenbaum
house, which exemplifies a style he espoused as typically American;
that is the Usonian style. One of this man's buildings which (*)
survived the Great Kanto earthquake was his Imperial Hotel in Tokyo.
He used a concentric spiral in designing the New York Guggenheim
Museum, and a house he designed for the Kaufmann family was built
partially over a waterfall. For 10 points, name this American
architect who led the Prairie School and designed Fallingwater. {Who's
Afraid of Virginia Woolf?} A "mousy" character in this work
continually drinks brandy even after throwing up, while another
relates the story of a boy who asked for a bergin and a water at a
bar. A History professor mistakes a member of the Biology Department
for one of Math in this play, and acts in it are titled The Exorcism
and (*) Walpurgisnacht. A story is invented in this play in which a
non-existent son crashes into a tree to avoid hitting a porcupine.
Games like Bringing Up Baby and Get the Guest are played in this play
in which Nick and Honey visit the bickering couple George and Martha
after a party. For 10 points, this is what play by Edward Albee?
{Scopes} Trial (or The State of Tennessee vs. John Thomas {Scopes}; or
the {Monkey} Trial before mentioned) Laughter during this event was
prompted by the response "Well, sometimes" to the question "Do you
think about things you do think about?" This event was organized by
George Rappleya and covered by H. L. Mencken for the Baltimore Sun.
Later overturned on a technicality, this court case fined the
defendant $100 for violating the (*) Butler Act, which had been
challenged by the ACLU. Held in Dayton, Tennessee, this case was
argued by Clarence Darrow and William Jennings Bryan. For 10 points,
name this 1925 Tennessee court case nicknamed the Monkey Trial
concerning the teaching of evolution in public schools.
{ferromagnetism} [accept word forms; prompt on magnetism] This
property is present in elements above the horizontal axis in the
Bethe-Slater curve, and it only occurs in materials with one or more
easy axes. Coercivity and remanence are characteristic properties of
materials with this property that increases in discrete steps as shown
by the Barkhausen effect. Owing to a (*) hysteresis loop, this
property remains in a material even after an applied field is removed,
though it disappears when a material is raised above the Curie
temperature. Bulk materials with this property consist of domains of
aligned spins. Cobalt, but not copper, possesses, for 10 points, what
form of permanent magnetism named after iron? Idi {Amin} Dada This
leader imprisoned the Scottish doctor Bob Astles for his support of
this ruler's predecessor. He attempted to take over a neighboring
country's province of Kagera, and banished all Asians from his
country. This man allowed a hijacked Air France plane to land in his
country, after which the Entebe raid was taken by Israel on that
plane. This leader attempted a failed invasion of Julius Nyerere's
(*)Tanzania, and he came to power in a coup that overthrew Milton
Obote. This man gave himself the eccentric titles of Conqueror of the
British Empire and King of Scotland. For 10 points, name this
notoriously brutal Ugandan dictator. {Mad Men} One character on this
show gets taken to a Bob Dylan concert by a gay European co-worker.
The main character hallucinates that his dead brother is his dentist
in one scene of this TV show. A character becomes a partner after
sleeping with a Jaguar executive, and the protagonist's wife sings (*)
"Zou bisou bisou" to him on his birthday. Characters on this show
include the alcoholic Duck Phillips and Pete Campbell, who rises to
head of accounts after blackmailing the protagonist about his Korean
War record. The main character marries Megan after divorcing the
January Jones-played Betty Francis, and works with Peggy and Roger at
Sterling Cooper until starting his own firm. For 10 points, name this
show about Don Draper, a 60's ad executive. {Sgt. Pepper's Lonely
Hearts Club Band} During the recording of this album, one band member
wandered onto the studio roof after accidentally taking LSD. One song
laments that "we gave her everything money could buy" and in another
the singer "would love to turn you on". The title track on this album
introduces the drummer as Billy Shears and one song ends with an E
major chord played on three grand pianos simultaneously. It was ranked
by Rolling Stone as the (*) best album of all time. For 10 points,
what 1967 Beatles album featuring hits such as "She's Leaving Home"
and "A Day in the Life" has album artwork featuring the title
fictional band? {karma} This is the pseudonym of professional video
games player Ben Jackson. A Marvel-comics superheroine of this name is
a French-Vietnamese lesbian and co- founder of the New Mutants. One
song with this phenomenon in its name states that a variety of it will
"get you/gonna knock you right in the head," and is by (*) John
Lennon. Another song about this phenomenon notes that "this is what
you get/when you mess with us", and begins by telling the titular
entity to "arrest this man." For 10 points, name this concept that is
paired with "police" in a Radiohead song, a Hindu concept often
compared with "dharma." {monkey}s On an episode of The League, one of
these animals haunts Taco after he throws it out of a moving car. A
band with this animal in its name sings songs like "When the Sun Goes
Down" and "I Bet You Look Good on the Dance Floor." On Community, Troy
names one of these animals after a piece Iof Annie's anatomy, and one
of these animals almost poisons Indiana Jones in Raiders of the Lost
Ark. In (*) Family Guy, an evil one resides in Chris's closet, and one
of them annoys Phil, Stu, and Alan in The Hangover Part II. For 10
points, name these mammals, examples of which include the "spider"
type and the macaque. {reddit}.com Frequent users of this website
include Drunken_Economist and Apostolate, who was once told "nobody
cares." A running joke on this website began when one person
frequently referenced the movie Rampart, while one of its users is
noted for the poor quality of his watercolors. Some of the more
frightening subsections of this website are ClopClop and SRS, though
it also includes (*) f7u12 and aww. Obama notably hosted a question
and answer session using this website. DAE and IAMA are frequently
used abbreviations on this website whose users are known for adoring
narwhals, bacon, and cats. For 10 points, name this social media
aggregate in which users may upvote posts to give karma. {Dallas}
{Cowboys} and {Washington} {Redskins} (only one out of each pair of
names needed) Two answers required. In the 1960s, fans of one of these
teams released a turkey into the hotel room of the owner of the other
team, George Marshall. One of these teams was formed after Clint
Murchison bought the rights to the fight song of the other team.
Players for these teams have included a free safety shot by robbers
and a now FOX commentator; those are (*) Sean Taylor and Troy Aikman.
The last game of the 2012-13 regular season occurred between these two
teams, in which a coach was criticized for not taking out his starting
quarterback. These two most valuable teams in the NFL are respectively
owned by Dan Snyder and Jerry Jones. For 10 points, name these two
teams with a notorious rivalry whose current quarterbacks are Robert
Griffin III and Tony Romo. Stephen {King} This author wrote a book in
which Ben Richards flees from Hunters on a lethal game show; that
book, The Running Man, was written under the pseudonym Richard
Bachman. This author wrote about the gunslinger Roland in his Dark
Tower series, while one of his novellas from the collection Different
Seasons was the basis for The (*) Shawshank Redemption. A movie based
on one of this author's books sees the title girl telekinetically
murder her classmates after being doused in pig blood. One of this
author's characters imprisons her favorite author in a cabin, while
another goes crazy while staying at a reclusive hotel. For 10 points,
name this man whose horror novels have included Carrie, Misery, and
The Shining. {"Creep"} Moby covered this song at Glastonbury at its
singer's bequest. This song was sued for its similarity to The
Hollies's "The Air That I Breathe". The radio version of this song
replaces the f-word with "very", and a choir cover of this song plays
during a trailer for The Social Network. The singer tells the
addressee "you float like a feather/ in a beautiful world" (*), and
the singer goes full falsetto when singing "she's running out the
door" repeatedly. This song, originally off of Pablo Honey, begins
"when you were here before/couldn't look you in the eye." For 10
points, name this depressing Radiohead song in which the singer is the
titular term for a weird person. {V}ice {P}resident of the United
States (accept {Veep}) In 30 Rock, Jack Donaghy frustrates a priest by
confessing to getting sodomized by a holder of this position. A knock-
off of "Where's Waldo" sees one look for a holder of this position in
places like a golf tournament, and a holder of this position tries to
kill Travis and his baby in the South Park episode "Lice Capades".
Leslie Knope has a crush (*) on the holder of this position, and Julia
Dreyfus holds this position on an HBO show. The current holder of this
position had an "autobiography" of him written by The Onion, and
famous holders of this position have done things like misspell potato
and shoot their hunting buddies. For 10 points, name this office
currently held by Joe Biden. {Rocky} {Balboa} (accept either or both
names; prompt on "The Italian Stallion") This character is called a
"creep-o" by the teenager Marie after he walks her home. He bribes a
janitor to go ice skating after hours with a pet shop employee. This
character normally works as a debt collector for the loan shark Tony
Gazzo, and he is friends with a worker at a meat packing plant, (*)
Paulie. The song "Gonna Fly Now" plays during this character's most
iconic moment, and he memorably yells "Yo, Adrian!" This character is
mentored by Mickey Goldmill, and he runs up the steps to the
Philadelphia art museum while training for a match against Apollo
Creed. For 10 points, name this title character of a Sylvester
Stallone movie about a boxer. {Rorshach} or {Walter} {Kovacs} (accept
any underlined portion) This character tells a joke with the punchline
"I am Pagliacci." He tells one character that he will be the "smartest
man in the morgue" if he does not heed his warning, and he begins a
graphic novel by remembering a "dog carcass in alley... tire tread on
burst stomach." He leaves his (*) diary in the New Frontiersman's
crank files, and his last words are "Do it! Do it!" He develops his
persona after Kitty Genovese's death, and his investigation of another
character's death leads him to discover that Ozymandias plans to unite
the world against a made-up alien threat. For 10 points, name this
vigilante in Alan Moore's Watchmen who takes his name from a
psychological test involving ink blots. "{Rainbow Connection}" A New
Zealand man held a radio station hostage demanding that it play this
song. Weezer covered this song with Hayley Williams of Paramore on a
2011 cover album, and in an episode of The Office, Andy sings this
song in pig latin. The singer wonders "who said that every wish would
be heard and answered", and believes that the title phenomenon is
"probably (*) magic". This song describes "the lovers, the dreamers,
and me" and asks "why are there so many songs" about the title
phenomenon, which first appeared in a Jim Henson movie. For 10 points,
name this song played on the banjo by Kermit the Frog in The Muppet
Movie. {Calvin} (prompt on Tracer Bullet, Stupendous Man, or Spaceman
Spiff before mentioned) This character's creator said that he would
never appear in an animated series because it was "very scary" to
think of this character's voice. In his last appearance, this
character says "Let's go exploring!" before getting on a sled. This
character once found a dying baby raccoon, and he plays a game in
which the only (*) rule is that "there are no rules." In one strip,
this character builds a cloning machine out of a paper box. This
character has the alter egos of a hardboiled detective and a spaceman
often encountering disgusting aliens. Alternately known as Tracer
Bullet and Spaceman Spiff, for 10 points, name this creation of Bill
Watterson who is paired with his stuffed tiger Hobbes. {Germany} (or
{Deutschland}, prompt on {W}est {Germany} until Peter Fox) The
"Medieval Metal" music genre in this country includes bands like In
Extremo and Subway to Sally. An event in this country led Roger Waters
to preform an entire album in this modern-day country with guests like
Bon Jovi and Bryan Adams. Peter Fox is a prominent musician in this
modern-day country, and a group from this country began a song with
"It's early morning, the sun comes out/last night was shaking and
pretty loud." In addition to being the home nation of (*) The
Scorpions, a band from this country sang a song whose title means "You
have." The best song from this country-ever-is about a nuclear war
accidentally begun by a floating item. For 10 points, name this home
country of Rammstein, Kraftwerk, "99 Luftballons" and the prodigal
David Hasslehoff. {Oreo}s (accept specific types like "Double Stuff")
One commercial for a spinoff of this product shows a mother exclaiming
"Shut the front door!" after taking a bite. Another commercial for
this product shows an empty stadium surrounding the Manning brothers
after they quit football to play a new sport involving this product,
in which they had earlier faced the Williams sisters. In 2012, for Gay
Pride month, an ad featuring a (*) rainbow version of this product was
created. One ad for this product has a man saying "You guys have to
stop fighting. We're the cops!" after a brawl erupts in a library due
to a debate over this product's best part, causing everyone to
whisper-yell. For 10 points, name this Nabisco food, for which a Super
Bowl ad sees people argue over whether the cookies or the cream are
the best part. Cary {Grant} This actor has been attributed with the
first modern onscreen use of a certain word, after his character in
one film cried "Because I just went gay, all of a sudden!". This actor
played a paleontologist alongside Kathernie Hepburn in a caper about a
search for a pet leopard. In addition to (*) Arsenic and Old Lace and
Bringing Up Baby he was frequently cast in dramatic roles by Alfred
Hitchcock, appearing in Notorious andTo Catch a Thief in addition to
his most famous role. Known for his distinct accent, for 10 points,
who was this American actor who was chased by a cropduster in an
iconic scene from North By Northwest? Jennifer {Lawrence} Skits from
an SNL show this person hosted included a fake ad for an 18-part The
Hobbit and a press conference in which the person's costar is shown to
be extremely short. This person who played Mystique in X-Men: First
Class was nominated for an Oscar for playing Ree Dolly in (*) Winter's
Bone. This actress is set to star in Serena aside Bradley Cooper, and
she said "You're just standing because I fell" after tripping to
receive an award. In one role, this actress befriended an Eagles fan
with bipolar disorder, and in another, she competes with Peeta in the
title event. For 10 points, name this actress who played Tiffany and
Katniss in Silver Linings Playbook and The Hunger Games, respectively.
Major {Tom} This character is alluded to in a Flight of the Conchords
skit where Jermaine tries to help Brett's self esteem. Jimmy Fallon
combined this character with Tim Tebow in a skit where this character
is talking to Jesus Christ. A sequel to the song that this character
appears in notes that this character is a "junkie, strung out in (*)
heavens high, hitting an all time low." This character appears in
"Ashes to Ashes" and a Peter Schilling song subtitled "Coming Home".
The "papers want to know what shirts he wears", and he is "sitting in
a tin can". After a malfunction on his spaceship, he sings to ground
control "tell my wife I love her very much- SHE KNOWS!" For 10 points,
name this doomed astronaut from David Bowie's "Space Oddity." {Tracy}
{Jordan} [accept either until Tracy is mentioned] As a child, this
fictional character was an actor on Ray Ray's Mystery Garage. This
character appeared in a Republican television ad imploring African-
Americans to refrain from voting in the 2008 political election. A man
named Donald cons him into giving him money, convincing him that he is
his out-of wedlock child. His two assistants are Grizz (*) and Dotcom,
and he is forced to appear on his namesake television program after
his movie career flops, much to the chagrin of Jenna Maroney. For 10
points, name this fictional character on the television show 30 Rock,
the alter-ego of Tracy Morgan. {xkcd} A running joke from this comic
involved a character's inability to properly use a boomerang. A moving
moment from this comic showed a normally evil character looking
forlornly at a diary. Early strips in this comic involved red spiders
and moving the hyphen in the word "sweet-ass." An infinite grid of
resistors was used to illustrate the activity of (*) nerd- sniping
within this comic, as carried out by the malevolent Black Hat Guy.
This comic has often referenced the creator's fear of velociraptors,
and it now has a What If? feature. For 10 points, name this webcomic
written by Randall Munroe with a four-letter name. {MuddyWaters}
Johnny Winter played with this man on his comeback album "Hard Again"
which features songs like Bus Driver and Jealous Hearted Man. In "Come
Together" the Beatles mention him after singing "he roller coaster, he
got early warning". His band, including Willie Dixon and (*) Pinetop
Perkins, recorded with Chess Records on songs like "I Can't Be
Satisfied" and "Hoochie Coochie Man". One of his songs inspired the
name of a British band who wrote songs like "Gimme Shelter" and "(I
Can't get No) Satisfaction". For 10 points, name this founder of
Chicago blues with songs like "Rollin Stone" and "Mannish Boy". Roger
{Federer} In 1998 as a junior tennis player, this man won both the
singles and doubles tournaments at Wimbledon, and lost the US Open
title to David Nalbandian. After defeating Mark Philippoussis in 2003,
this player won his first Wimbledon title, which this man is tied with
Pete Sampras for having a record seven of. He was described as a
"great liquid whip" in an essay by (*) David Foster Wallace. At one
point, this player held the world number one position for a record 237
consecutive weeks. This man is a member of the Big Four along with
Murray, Djokovic, and Rafael Nadal. For 10 points, name this Swiss
tennis player considered one of the greatest of all time. Ed {Sheeran}
This artist covered the Pink Floyd song "Wish You Were Here" at the
closing ceremony of the London Olympics, and one of his music videos
stars Rupert Grint in the role of an obsessed fan. In addition to
"Lego House," he has written several songs for One Direction and
collaborated with (*) Taylor Swift on "Everything Has Changed." In the
most famous song from his debut album, he laments how "the worst
things in life come free to us" and describes a drug-addicted
prostitute who is "stuck in her daydream, been this way since
eighteen." For 10 points, name this British singer-songwriter whose
2011 album "+" features the song "The A Team." {detective} (accept
{private eye}, {p}rivate {i}nvestigator, or other reasonable
equivalents; prompt on "policeman") One character with this occupation
hires Natalie Teeger after Sharona Fleming leaves as his personal
nurse. That character is played by Tony Shalhoub and is the star of a
USA Network show, while another man with this occupation frequently
says "just one more thing." The former character with this occupation
is the (*) OCD-afflicted Monk, while the latter is Columbo. Kate
Beckett holds this occupation, leading the mystery author Richard
Castle to work with her. Benedict Cummerbatch plays a character with
this occupation in a BBC show. For 10 points, name this occupation of
a character who appears in Elementary and Sherlock. {Django Unchained}
A CollegeHumor skit claiming to summarize this movie it just its staff
shaking its head with the message "we're not going to go there."One
character in this movie is annoyed by another's playing of a Beethoven
piece on the harp. This movie's director makes a cameo as an
Australian blown up with dynamite, and the titular character watches
an escapee torn apart by dogs. A character is told to "say good bye
(*) to Miss Lara", after which Miss Lara is shot. One character
refuses to shake hands with a francophile Mississippi planter, Calvin
Candide. The titular character is assisted in rescuing his wife,
Broomhilda, by the Christoph Waltz-played Dr. Schultz. For 10 points,
name this Quentin Tarantino movie staring Jaimie Foxx as the titular
bounty hunter. {Peru} Soccer players from this include Jefferson
Farfan and Jose Guerrero, as well as Teofillio Cubillas, who led them
to their highest ever finishes in the 1970 and 1978 World Cups. A film
set in this country's jungle sees a rubber baron, Brian Sweeney
Fitzgerald, fulfill his dream of hearing Enrico Caruso singing by
dragging an opera house across the wilderness- that movie, directed by
Werner Herzog, is Fitzcarraldo. Herzog also filmed Aguirre, the Wrath
of God here. It is the setting of a South Park episode in which killer
(*) hamsters invade the United States. For 10 points, name this
country whose national dish is ceviche and who gave the world pan-pipe
music. The {Arcade Fire} In the movie This Must Be The Place, a little
boy believes the titular song was written by this band and not the
Talking Heads. An album by this band ends with a track relating "Alice
died/in the night/ I'd been learning to drive." That album contains
songs like "Haiti" and "In the Backseat". One of this band's songs
begins "let's go downtown and watch the modern kids", "Rococco". This
band of songs like "Month of May" and "No Cars Go" put four (*)
"Neighborhood" songs on their first album, and this band
controversially won the 2011 Grammy for Album of the Year for Funeral.
This band's most famous song was used in the trailer for Where The
Wild Things Are. For 10 points, name this Canadian indie band, who put
the song "Wake Up" and the album Funeral. {zombies} [accept {living
dead} before mention; accept {walking dead}; accept {reanimated};
accept other obvious equivalents; laughingly prompt on {human}] These
creatures appear in a video game near a crossing bridge, killing Bill
as he tries to lower it. Max Brooks has written several books about
these creatures which also appear in a movie in which (*) Shaun is
played by Simon Pegg. TellTale games produced an episodic video game
adaptation of a show which includes these creatures and former sheriff
Rick Grimes. George Romero has directed several movies involving these
creatures that appear in the Thriller music video. Headshots are
usually required to kill them and they often desire eating brains. For
10 points, name these creatures described as the living dead. {Kobe}
Bryant [accept Black Mamba before mention] This player was featured in
an album by Taiwanese artist Jay Chou as well as by rapper Sho Baraka.
As a rookie this player served a backup role behind Eddie Jones. This
player was immediately traded after being drafted by Charlotte out of
(*) Lower Merion High School. He switched from number 8 to number 24
in 2003 after allegations of sexual assault and recorded 81 points in
a 2006 game against the Toronto Raptors. His team failed to win the
2011 NBA Championship and provide a fourth three-peat for Coach Phil
Jackson. For 10 points, name this Los Angeles Lakers shooting guard
nicknamed the "Black Mamba." {performing} on {S}aturday {N}ight {L}ive
(or being the {musical guest} for {S}aturday {N}ight {L}ive\- as long
as they know what's going on, be lenient) While preforming this
action, Rage Against The Machine were thrown out of a certain building
for refusing to remove some upside down American flags. Ashlee Simpson
preformed a jig while doing this action after it became clear she was
lip-syncing, and a famous performance of this action was supposed to
involve the displaying of a photo of a Bosnian refugee (*). One
performer of this action was mocked for looking like a robot while
singing "Video Games", and Sinead O'Connor tore up a picture of the
Pope while performing this action. Justin Bieber and Mick Jagger have
preformed this action while also appearing as the host. For 10 points,
name this action done by a musical act on a certain weekend late-night
show. {Gorillaz} A member of this band claimed to have lost his
virginity at the age of nine with a dinner lady in the autobiography
Rise of the Ogre. One of this band's songs contains the lyrics "Love
forever, love is free / Let's turn forever you and me." That song
opens with a maniacal laugh and has a music video with a (*) windmill
atop a floating island. The single "Melancholy Hill" appeared on this
band's most recent studio album, Plastic Beach. This band was created
by Damon Albarn and Jamie Hewlett and consists of the fictional
characters 2D, Murdoc, Noodle, and Russel. For 10 points, name this
virtual band whose second album Demon Days included the singles "Dirty
Harry" and "Feel Good, Inc." {How I Met Your Mother} In one episode of
this series, the song "Two Weeks" is played over a montage showing the
"second greatest love story" the protagonist has ever heard. The
protagonist's mother marries the hippy Clint, and receives a late-
night call to "make juice" with a love interest. A character goes on
The Price Is Right to meet Bob Barker (*), who he believes to be his
father. That character gives up his womanizing ways to propose to
Robin Sherbatsky, who had earlier dated this show's main character,
Ted Mosby. For 10 points, name this show featuring Neil Patrick Harris
as Barney Stinson, who is the best bro of Ted, who searches for the
titular figure. Nicolas Kim {Coppola} (grudgingly accept Nicholas
{Cage}, but tell players "that's only the name he took on in his
mortal form") In one of the fictional trailers from Grindhouse, this
actor played Fu Manchu in Werewolf Women of the SS. A still of this
actor looking mockingly inquisitive with wide eyes from Vampire's Kiss
inspired the "You don't say?" meme, while in another internet famous
moment, this man is made a pagan (*) sacrifice in the The Wicker Man
as he he yells "Not the bees!" [pronounced "BEEEEEEEEES"]. In one role
he plays a motorcyclist who receives a flaming skull, and in another
role this comic book fan who named his son Kal-El plays the real-life
superhero Big Daddy; those are from Ghost Rider and Kick-Ass. For 10
points, name this actor who steals the Declaration of Independence in
National Treasure. {Power Rangers} [accept specific incarnations as
long as Power Rangers is included] This group's longest standing
member was Tommy Oliver and this group fought an evil Psycho version
of itself. This group traveled back in time to capture the mutant
Ransik and was led by Andros while in space. It has been powered by
Zeo crystals and advanced technology and first fought Rita and Lord
(*) Zed after being created by Zordon. That group lived in Angel Grove
and used dinosaur based machines called Zords. Its incarnations
include the currently running Samurai version and the original Mighty
Morphin ones. For 10 points, name this group titling a children's
television series usually consisting of five teenagers led by a red
themed boy. Jean Valjean for three, or 30 for all four correct.  A.
This main character, a peasant, had stolen a loaf of bread to feed his
family, and was sentenced to five years in prison, which got extended
to nineteen years because of his escape attempts. As an ex-convict, he
has trouble finding work and being treated fairly. matrix
multiplication ( or  matrix multiply) The fastest known algorithm for
this operation, published in 2011 by Vassilevska Williams, takes time
proportional to the order of the inputs raised to the power of two
point three seven two seven, and is an extension of a divide-and-
conquer method by Strassen, where the trick is to take one fewer
scalar product at the cost of extra scalar sums in the base case of
order two. For 10 points, what is this operation that, relative to a
common basis, gives the coefficients of the composition of two linear
transformations? acute accent (accept accent aigu) In Polish, it's
known as a kreska and is used on consonants to indicate
palatalization. It has the same function in Croatian and Bosnian, but
is used only on the letter C. In Czech, it is used only on vowels, and
denotes lengthening, as it also does in Hungarian, which has a double
version that typographers call a hungarumlaut. In Dutch, Greek, and
Spanish, it marks a stressed syllable, but for 10 points, what
diacritical mark is best known to Canadians to indicate a higher vowel
sound on the letter E in French and in French loan words such as
résumé? the Orange Order Founded in 1795, its Canadian branch was
established in 1830 by Ogle R. Gowan in Brockville, Upper Canada. By
the 1920s, Canadians made up over half its worldwide membership, who
have included Prime Ministers John Diefenbaker, Sir John Abbott, Sir
John A. Macdonald, and Sir Mackenzie Bowell, who had been its Grand
Master of British North America. Today it is active mainly in Northern
Ireland, where it began. For 10 points, name this pro-monarchist
Protestant fraternal society whose annual parades commemorate the
Battle of the Boyne and the victory of King William. Dutch disease
Botswana may have experienced this phenomenon in the 1980s, when a
boom in diamond production was accompanied by lower agricultural
productivity. Some evidence that it's occurring in Canada comes from a
June 2012 OECD report showing a one-third drop in manufacturing's
share of employment over eleven years, "clearly correlated with
exchange-rate developments." Originally named by the Economist
newspaper for a result of the exploitation of the Slochteren gas
field, for 10 points, what is this effect that occurs when natural
resource exports raise the value of a nation's currency, making other
industries less competitive? India ink ( or  Indian ink) In order to
make this, start with completely charred charcoal, wood, or bone.
Pulverize with a pestle, and place in a ceramic bowl. Add distilled
water, and either gum arabic or gelatin or shellac as a binding agent.
Then either let it dry into cakes, or store it in an airtight bottle.
If it was made with shellac, then you might need to use methyl hydrate
to unclog it once it's in your pen. For 10 points, what is this long-
lasting black pigment, now most commonly used for drawing, that
despite its name, originated in ancient Egypt and China? Rob Roy A
carefully guarded portmanteau carried by a nervous traveller named
Morris is stolen, and this novel's protagonist is suspected. It turns
out that Morris works for the government, and the portmanteau holds
gold to pay English soldiers. The protagonist, Frank, sent to live
with relatives in Northumberland at Osbaldistone Manor, flees to
Scotland, and becomes embroiled in pro- and anti-Jacobite intrigues,
but is saved by the title character in, for 10  points, what Walter
Scott novel named after the historical "Robin Hood of Scotland" of the
proscribed clan MacGregor? Ecuadorian Embassy There are forty-four of
them in the world. The one in Canada, at 50 O'Connor Street in Ottawa,
was established in 1972 and initially led by Armando Pesantes, an
appointee of Guillermo Rodríguez Lara, but is now headed by Andrés
Terán Parral, appointed in 2011 by Rafael Correa. Ana Albán Mora heads
the one at 3 Hans Crescent in London, England, which acquired a new
resident on June 19, 2012, when Julian Assange requested asylum.  For
10 points, what are these diplomatic missions? Mary Magdalene July
twenty-second is the feast day of this patron saint of glovemakers,
tanners, pharmacists, and hairstylists, who according to Mark's and
Luke's gospels was cleansed by Jesus of seven demons. Roman Catholic
tradition differs from Protestantism and Eastern Orthodoxy in also
considering her to be the same person who pours perfume over Jesus'
feet in Bethany and is the sister of Lazarus and Martha. For 10
points, whom do the gospels record as the first witness of Jesus'
resurrection? Flin Flon Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting Company was
founded at this city's namesake  copper-zinc ore body in 1927, named
after the main character in The Sunless City, a science fiction novel
by J. E. Preston Muddock. Today the smokestack at its smelter is
Western Canada's tallest free-standing structure. In summer, Ross Lake
is the centre of its annual Trout Festival, and in winter, residents
cheer on the local junior hockey team, the Bombers. For 10 points,
what is this city that's partly in Saskatchewan but mostly in
Manitoba? gamma globulin Its presence is indicated in the rightmost of
the five regions of a serum electrophoresis gel.  If you don't have
enough of it, you suffer from common variable immunodeficiency.
Prepared from pooled plasma, it's given to people at high risk for
rubella, measles, or chickenpox, but is most commonly injected to
develop active immunity against hepatitis A.  For 10 points, what is
this kind of antibody-containing serum protein that is distinct from
albumin and similar types alpha-1, alpha-2, and beta? table tennis (
or  ping pong, or  wiff waff) Preliminary rounds for this sport began
today at London's Excel Centre. Three competitors are at their seventh
Olympics: Belgium's Jean-Michel Saive, Sweden's Jörgen Persson, and
Croatia's Zoran Primorac, who uses the Timo Boll Spirit blade. Singles
matches consist of best of seven games, with the winner of each game
being the first player to eleven, with a two-point margin. Boris
Johnson proclaimed four years ago in Beijing that this game would be
"coming home", because, for 10 points, what indoor sport was invented
in 19th-century England but since the early twentieth century has been
dominated by China? nattering nabobs of negativism This label was
first applied in San Diego on September 11, 1970, at the California
Republican state convention, to refer to members of a group that the
same speaker had a year earlier called "an effete corps of impudent
snobs". Said to have "formed their own 4-H  Club: the hopeless,
hysterical hypochondriacs of history" in a speech written by William
Safire, for 10 points, what was the term used by Vice President Spiro
Agnew for babbling elite complainers? swan song It's the title of a
one-act sketch with two characters, Nikita Ivanitch and sixty-eight-
year-old comedian Vasili Svietlovidoff, who does most of the talking
in this very first play by Anton Chekhov. The expression derives from
a legend that was refuted from scientific observation by Pliny the
Elder, but Aesop incorporates it in a fable about mistaken identity
with a goose.  Its first known use in English is by the Reverend John
Willison, applying it to King David's last words. For 10 points, what
is this legendary first and final call of a dying Cygnus olor?
Sargasso Sea This body of water is unique for harbouring drift algae
that are holopelagic, meaning that they reproduce vegetatively and
never attach to the seafloor. A large expanse of still water half the
size of Canada, it includes the spawning grounds of all European and
American eels. Named for the type of seaweed found on its surface that
Columbus called a "solid mat", it's bounded by the Canary Current, the
Gulf Stream, and the North Equatorial and North Atlantic Currents. For
10 points, what is this body of water south and east of Bermuda?
calcium carbonate This chemical compound is sold industrially as
either the "ground" type, which is irregularly rhombohedral, or the
"precipitated" type, which has uniformly sized particles with
diameters on the order of nanometres and is used in producing
sealants, plastics, and paper. It makes up ninety-five per cent of an
eggshell, and is often taken as a dietary supplement against
osteoporosis, or as an antacid. For 10 points, what is this compound
that's the main constituent of marble, chalk, and limestone? David
Douglas Born in the village of Scone in Scotland, he was sent by the
Royal Horticultural Society to gather undiscovered plants from the
Pacific Northwest. This explorer succeeded wildly, introducing into
cultivation many tree species, including the Sitka Spruce, Ponderosa
Pine, and Noble Fir. A second expedition in 1833  took him from Fort
Vancouver to Fort St James in the BC interior, but the rough waters
around Fort George Canyon claimed all his specimens. FTP, name this
botanist with 80 species named after him, including a very large
evergreen that is not a true fir. Boyle’s Law Its namesake discoverer
called it Mr. Towneley's hypothesis, and the experimental apparatus
used to prove it was built by his assistant, Robert Hooke. It was
Richard Towneley and his physician friend Robert Power who used the
recently-invented barometer to measure air pressure at different
altitudes, and recognised a relation between the density of air and
its pressure. FTP, name the law stating that for a fixed amount of an
ideal gas kept at a fixed temperature, pressure and volume are
inversely proportional. Mount Kennedy In 1964, the Canadian government
named this geographical feature in the southwest Yukon, at the time
the highest unclimbed peak in North America. “It is appropriate that
Canada’s memorial should be a mountain – a graceful, towering
mountain,” Prime Minister Lester Pearson told the House of Commons.
The next year, Everest climber Jim Whittaker led its first ascent,
taking along several experienced mountaineers, plus one inexperienced
junior senator from New York, who was allowed to summit first, say a
prayer, and bury some mementos from his brother’s inauguration. FTP,
name this 14,000-foot mountain in the St. Elias Range, named after the
35th President of the United States. Jose Bautista The Baltimore
Orioles selected him in the Rule 5 draft in 2004, and he went on to
spend time on five major league rosters that year, settling in with a
National League Central team for the next few years. But his
breakthrough didn’t come until he was acquired by an American League
team at the trade deadline in 2008 with whom he broke the club’s
single-season homerun record in 2010, a mark previously held by George
Bell. FTP, name this slugger who led the major leagues in home runs in
2010 and 2011 as a member of the Toronto Blue Jays. Antonio Canova His
depiction of George Washington currently sits in North Carolina’s
Museum of History, while the model of his never-built monument to
Horatio Nelson is housed in his namesake Gipsoteca. An art historian
recently claimed that this artist “cheated” in marble by relying
partly on a plaster cast of a model's breasts.  Presumably this
alleged cast was not from Napoleon’s sister, the nominal model for one
of his many sculptures. FTP, name this artist best known for
classically-themed works such as The Three Graces, Venus Victrix, and
Psyche. Hathor Over 4000 years ago, in the region where this deity was
worshipped, the Milky Way during the fall and spring equinoxes aligned
the sun’s path over the heavens. In one account, its four legs of may
be seen as the pillars on which the sky was supported, with the stars
on their bellies constituting the long pool of milk on which Ra sailed
his solar barque. Structures in her Temple at Dendera were built from
the Middle Kingdom to the time of Trajan. FTP, name this cow goddess
who personified joy, feminine love, and motherhood. anomie One of its
popularizers asserted that communities are psychic beings, with
distinctive ways of thinking and feeling. An individual’s sadness, he
wrote, comes not from “this or that incident in his life, but from the
group to which he belongs.” The collapse of normative regulation of
societal relationships through rules and shared values, leads to this
phenomenon, where personal feelings of despair, isolation and
meaninglessness grow and potentially erupt as individual pathologies
and civic disorders. FTP, name this concept expounded on by Robert
Merton and Emile Durkheim. Joni Mitchell She was praised in a Vibe
magazine essay called “Black and Blond,” which named among her
admirers Prince, Seal, and Janet Jackson, and highlighted her 1979
collaboration with Charles Mingus. The inspiration for Led Zeppelin’s
“Going to California”, and Crosby Stills Nash and Young’s “Our House,”
as well as Chelsea Clinton’s name, this Saskatchewan native was first
introduced to a wide audience through Judy Collins’s covers. FTP, name
this singer-songwriter of A Case of You, Big Yellow Taxi, and
Woodstock. arrow A 2010 excavation at the Sibudu Cave in South Africa
uncovered 64,000 -year-old examples of these objects. Modern ones
typically range from 30 to 38 inches, while the Society for Creative
Anachronism requires padded heads of at least 1¼ inches in diameter.
In most cultures, they came with end pieces that act as airfoils to
help stabilize their flight, called a fletching. FTP, name this object
that is shot from a bow. The Sense of an Ending The author of this
two-part novel borrowed its title from a 1967 book by Frank Kermode.
Through the eyes of the narrator, the second part of the novel
reevaluates the first after the narrator receives £500 as an
inheritance from the deceased mother of Veronica. The first part
includes the reflections by the narrator on his childhood and
university days with Adrian Finn, which were challenged by the
philosophical dilemma of suicide. Narrated by the retired and solitary
Tony Webster, FTP name this 2011 Man Booker Prize-winning novel by
Julian Barnes. trie [TRY] or prefix tree (prompt for spelling if the
answer sounds like TREE, do not accept directed acyclic word graph or
suffix tree) It serves as the fundamental basis for Burstsort and can
be seen as a deterministic finite automaton. As the number of items it
stores get large, the speeds at which its inserts, finds, and deletes
become very similar. Unlike a binary search tree, this does not have
to be balanced, and unlike a hash table, this facilitates longest-
prefix matching. Useful in spell-checking applications, FTP, name this
data structure invented by Edward Fredkin in which the keys associated
with the nodes are not explicitly stored, but rather defined by their
positions in the tree. Cote d'Ivoire or accept Ivory Coast US
Immigration and Customs Enforcement arrested a colonel from this
country for attempting to purchase and smuggle weapons into his home
country. That hasn’t stopped this country from having two civil wars
in the last ten years, the last one ending in 2011 with the arrest of
Laurent Gbagbo. Gbagbo started the war by refusing to acknowledge the
2010 election victory for Alassane Ouattara. FTP, name this African
country whose capital is Yamoussoukro and its largest city is Abidjan.
La Mamma Morta A favourite of Andrew Beckett’s, this aria for soprano
is sung by the character of Maddalena di Coigny.  She sings of
Bersei’s prostitution to save her after the burning of her childhood
home and sacrificial death of her mother to also save her during the
French Revolution. The both melancholic and triumphant aria is from
the 1896 opera “Andrea Chénier” by Umberto Giordano. FTP name this
song, whose title translates from the Italian to English as “The Death
Mother.” Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus It was partially written when
the author was a prisoner of war in Como, and it was the only book-
length work of philosophy published at the time of its author’s death.
“A logical picture of facts is a thought” and “a proposition is a
truth-function of elementary propositions” are two of seven primary
propositions outlined by the work, which consists of a series of
hierarchical and numbered statements. FTP, name this work originally
written in German that was highly influential to the logical
positivists written by Ludwig Wittgenstein. William Carlos Williams
“If I admire my arms, my face, / my shoulders, flanks, buttocks /
again the yellow drawn shades,-- /  Who shall say I am not / the happy
genius of my household?” So concludes his poem “Danse Russe,”
published in the 1917 collection “Al Que Quiere!” FTP, name this
American poet who followed with the 1923  collection “Spring and All,”
containing the signature imagist poem “The Red Wheelbarrow”. Stieg
Larsson Aided by the translation of his first novel into English, he
became for 2008 the second best-selling novelist in the world, after
Khalid Hosseni. Not bad for one who began his writing career in
amateur science fiction. A journalism career led to his first book-
length work, Extremhögern, which exposed far right and racist
organizations in Sweden, leading to prominence in the national media
as well as death threats from his political enemies. FTP, name this
author who gained posthumous fame for his novels about Lisbeth
Salander. Bismuth In 2010, the US consumed 884 tonnes of it, the
majority of which went into chemicals. The Incas also used it, along
with copper and tin, in a special bronze alloy for knives. It is one
of the few elements where its liquid state is denser than its solid
state, and it is also technically radioactive, though its only known
primordial isotope has a half-life a billion times the estimated age
of the universe. FTP, name this brittle metal that is removed from
lead through the Betterton-Kroll Process with atomic number 83,
denoted by the symbol Bi. Maharashtra If this were a country, it would
be the 10th most populous in the world. The hilly range Sahyadri runs
parallel to its coast, and it is separated into 6 administrative
divisions, one of which is Pune. Bordered by the Arabian sea to the
west, FTP, name this Indian state, the third largest by area, home of
Bollywood, with its capital at Mumbai. Diamond Cutter Sutra (also
accept Diamond Sutra) Thus I have heard that this spiritual text
describes a conversation between the Buddha and Subhūti, in which the
Buddha poses questions to challenge perceptions of permanence and
realities. The Buddha teaches that someone who learns four lines of
the discourse and gives them away has more merit than someone who
fills innumerable worlds with goods and gives them away. The famous
last verse describes the world as,  “A flash of lightning in a summer
cloud...” The lesson, of course, is emptiness. It describes a central
concept in Mahāyāna Buddhism and is a component of “The  Perfection of
Wisdom.” For ten points, name this sutra, which is thought to be the
oldest surviving printed book in the world. Ryan Alexander Jenkins A
Calgary-born investment banker, he murdered model Jasmine Fiore in Los
Angeles in 2009, removing her teeth and fingertips to prevent
identification of the body. However, 11  VETO 2012  Pack by Lindsey
Burnett, Rob Freeman, Adam Hancock, Mike Whitaker, and Steph Wilson
police were able to make an ID from the serial numbers on her breast
implants, and tracked him to a Hope, BC, motel where he had committed
suicide. Reference re. Ng Extradition 15  VETO 2012  Pack by Lindsey
Burnett, Rob Freeman, Adam Hancock, Mike Whitaker, and Steph Wilson
This American was accused of murdering 11 people but fled to Canada
before his trial.  The US petitioned for extradition, but he faced the
death penalty. The court concluded that the extradition did not
violate the Charter, and he was sent back to California and to death
row. (However, the court reversed their opinion in United States v.
Burns [2001]). Permafrost or Cryotic soil 18  VETO 2012  Pack by
Lindsey Burnett, Rob Freeman, Adam Hancock, Mike Whitaker, and Steph
Wilson This natural geological phenomenon which reduces the load-
bearing capability of the ground and threatens structural integrity of
the rail line is doubly challenging on the Tibetan Plateau: the
overall temperature is high, and the high saline content further
reduces the freezing point. Bishops' Wars (accept Bellum Episcopale)
19  VETO 2012  Pack by Lindsey Burnett, Rob Freeman, Adam Hancock,
Mike Whitaker, and Steph Wilson Prior to the English Civil War,
Lovelace fought for King Charles I in these political and military
conflicts, running from 1639-1640, which centered around the King’s
desire to introduce a new system of church government to Scotland.
Pandit Jawaherlal Nehru  AR This man once declared that “no nation can
be great whose people are narrow in thought or in action” in a plea
against communal violence. This man coined the term “Non-Aligned
Movement” to describe his  country’s unwillingness to firmly align
itself with either the Soviet Union or the United States. This man
announced that “a moment comes rarely in history when the soul of a
nation, long suppressed, finds utterance”  as his country gained its
independence, and that quotation is from a speech titled “A Tryst with
Destiny”.  This man had a relationship with Lady Edwina Mountbatten,
and his daughter was assassinated for ordering the storming of the
Golden Temple in Amritsar. For 10 points, identify this man, the
father of Indira Gandhi and the first and longest-serving Prime
Minister of India. Jane Austen  HZ One of this author’s characters
advises, “Run mad as often as you choose, but do not faint.” Another
character created by this author once claimed that “nature has given
[women] so much [understanding] that they never find it necessary to
use more than half.” That character is a clergyman whose “filial
disobedience” ends in his marriage to Catherine. This author also
wrote about a man who is almost seduced by Mary Crawford only to
realize he is in love with his cousin Fanny, while another novel by
this author sees the illegitimate Harriet end up with a farmer, but
not before she sets her sights on both Mr. Elton and Mr. Knightley.
For 10 points, name this author of Mansfield Park  and Emma, who wrote
about Elizabeth Bennet in Pride and Prejudice. trapezius  LY This
muscle of the human body is innervated by the spinal accessory nerve
and the ventral ramii of the C3 and C4 nerves. Its blood supply comes
from the transverse cervical artery. This muscle originates on the
external occipital protuberance and the superior third of the
ligamentum nuchae, as well as the spinous processes of all the
cervical and thoracic vertebrae. It inserts on the posterior lateral
third of the clavicle.  The upper fibres of this muscle run
inferiorly, the middle fibres, horizontally, and the lower fibres,
superiorly, to the scapula. For 10 points, name the most superficial
muscle of the posterior thorax, which has a flat and triangular shape.
Oedipus  AR In a play titled after one of this man’s daughters, Queen
Eurydice kills herself when she sees the cruelty of her husband, and
this man received a prophecy that he would die on land that was sacred
to the Furies. This man sent Creon to the Oracle of Delphi in an
attempt to end the pestilence that affected the city he ruled.  After
his exile, his sons shared his kingdom, with each son ruling the city
for a year at a time, and the failure of that arrangement led his
elder son, Polynices, to lead the armies of the Seven Against Thebes.
Raised by Polybus and Merope, this man unwittingly killed his birth
father in a dispute over a road-crossing. For 10 points, identify this
man who, according to Sophocles’ account, used Jocasta’s pin to blind
himself after realizing that the woman he had been sleeping with was
his mother. Nellie McClung  JL In 2009, this person became one of the
first honorary senators named by the Canadian government, and Barbara
Paterson crafted a well-known likeness of this person. This person
took a stance in support of eugenics, and mocked Sir Rodman Roblin in
a play that declared, “Politics unsettle men and unsettled men means
unsettled bills, broken furniture, broken vows, and divorce.” This
person asked, “Why are pencils equipped with erasers if not to correct
mistakes?” while arguing in support of equal divorce laws, and this
person who wrote The Women’s Parliament  was amongst the group who won
a landmark court case allowing women to sit in the Canadian Senate.
For 10 points, name this suffragette who helped win the Persons Case
as part of the Manitoba Famous Five. surface tension  AR The
relationship between this quantity and the contact angle can be
studied using the Young-Dupre equation.  An important rule concerning
this property dictates that is has a linear dependence on temperature,
and a direct consequence of that rule named after Eotvos is that there
must exist a critical point where this value is zero. In a
simultaneously isobaric and isothermal system, the partial derivative
of Gibbs free energy with respect to area yields this quantity.
Differences in this property between two interfaces yield to the
formation of tear drops of wine in the Marangoni effect, and more
commonly results in the formation of a meniscus in burettes and test
tubes. For 10 points, name this property that causes bubbles to take
shape and water to form drops. Shania Twain [accept Eilleen Regina
Edwards]  AR The music video for one of this singer’s earliest singles
was directed by Sean Penn and sees her go to a club with her partner,
but end up spending the night by herself. That song, “Dance With The
One That Brought You”, was off this singer’s self-titled debut album.
One of the singles off this singer’s third album sees her snidely turn
down various men because she is searching for someone who will keep
her “warm in the middle of the night”. “That Don’t Impress Me Much”,
“Any Man Of Mine” and “Man! I Feel Like A Woman!” are  tracks by, for
10 points, what Canadian superstar who achieved the best- selling
album by a female artist, as well as the best-selling country album of
all time, with her 1997 album, Come On Over ? Toronto [give 10 points
and a high five for Phyllis Gotlieb before “a poem about”]  HZ “A
deaf-mute talking to himself in sign language” is an image evoked in a
poem about “Thirty-Six Ways of Looking at [this city]”, and that poem
is by Phyllis Gotlieb. This city’s current Poet Laureate was
shortlisted for the 2011 Griffin Poetry Prize for her work Ossuaries,
and this city titles an unfinished trilogy whose first novel is
narrated by the ghost of Connor Gilmartin. One novel set in this city
depicts the lives of Macedonian immigrants such as Nicolas Temelcoff,
as they help build one of this city’s notable landmarks, the Prince
Edward viaduct. For 10 points, name this setting of such novels as
Murther and Walking Spirits  and In the Skin of a Lion, the current
home of Dionne Brand and Margaret Atwood, which is also Canada’s
largest city. Yousef Karsh  JL An early work by this artist shows two
women dressed in black with one instructing the other on a ballet
stance. That work was an experiment in incandescent lighting, titled
Ballet Lesson. This artist’s time with the Little Theatre led him to
become a master of artificial lights, and he used this knowledge to
light the hands separately when he photographed a subject. One of this
man’s works contains a large vase with a nude woman painted on it in
the right half of the frame, while the left half shows the artist
whose ceramic studio the photo was taken in, Pablo Picasso. This man’s
most famous portrait was staged when he took a cigar out of his
subject’s mouth, and that photo, titled Roaming Lion, is the most
reproduced photograph of Winston Churchill. For 10 points, name this
Armenian-born Canadian portrait photographer, the brother of Malak
Karsh. Jean-Jacques Rousseau  HZ One work by this thinker claimed that
the source of happiness was “far niente”  or “doing nothing”, and that
work was a series of meditations on this man’s exile, titled Reveries
of a Solitary Walker. Another of this thinker’s works claims, “The
search... for principles and axioms in science... is beyond a woman’s
grasp,” and that work was heavily criticized by Mary Wollstonecraft.
This thinker advocated splitting administration into two parts: a
“sovereign” to represent the general will, and a “government” to apply
the law, in a work which states, “The legislative power belongs to the
people, and can belong to it alone.” For 10 points, name this author
of Emile, who stated, “Man is born free, and everywhere he is in
chains,” in The Social Contract. Haber-Bosch process  AR Kjeldahl and
Kuhlmann both name methods related to this procedure, and the
mechanism for this procedure was first described in detail by Gerhardt
Ertl. This method originally used osmium as a catalyst, though modern
variations use either enhanced iron or ruthenium catalysts, and it is
named for a man who developed a method for analyzing reaction energies
with Max Born. This process uses methane as a source of hydrogen gas,
and passes gases over four beds of catalyst at high pressure and
temperature to fix inert nitrogen gas.  For 10 points, name this most
widely used method for the industrial production of ammonia. Joanna
the Mad or Juana la Loca [accept Joanna of Aragon or Joanna of Castile
until those kingdoms are mentioned]  KV One conflict during this
monarch’s reign was the Battle of Villalar, in which her son’s victory
ended the Revolt of the Comuneros. This monarch’s husband and father
signed a treaty to keep her out of government, though her father
reneged the same day that it was signed. After her husband Philip I’s
death, her country fell into disorder when neither she nor her six-
year-old son were perceived fit to rule. After her father’s death, her
son ascended to the throne as the first monarch of the unified kingdom
of Spain; that son was Holy Roman Emperor Charles I. For 10 points,
name this second daughter of Ferdinand and Isabella, and first queen
regnant of the kingdoms of both Castile and Aragon, who had a history
of mental illness. “Le Chandail d’Hockey” or “The Hockey Sweater”  HZ
The main conflict in this story occurs because the protagonist’s
mother is concerned that her family will look poor, prompting her to
send a letter requesting the title object. The protagonist states that
that title object “weighed on my shoulders like a mountain” and is
sent by the vicar to pray for God’s forgiveness, but he instead prays
for God “to send, as quickly as possible, moths that would eat up” the
title object.  The narrator states that his “real life was on the
skating rink” and attests to his town’s obsession with Maurice Richard
in, for 10 points, which story quoted on the five-dollar bill, which
begins, “The winters of my childhood were long, long seasons”? Gebhard
Leberecht von Blucher  AS This man fought in the Promeranian War
between Sweden and Prussia, but was captured by a Prussian Hussar
regiment, and ended up joining their side for the remainder of the
war. Although Frederick the Great of Prussia once said that this
person could “go to the devil”, he was eventually made commander of
the Prussian army during the Napoleonic Wars. He spent the entire
battle of Ligny trapped underneath his dead horse. Known for defeating
Napoleon at the Battle of Waterloo along with co-commander Arthur
Wellesley, for 10 points, name this famed Prussian military commander.
Karen Kain  JL Under the tutelage of Rudolf Nureyev, this woman and
Frank Augustyn were known as the “gold dust  twins” and won their
category in the 1973 competition in Moscow where she also won silver
in the women’s category. Her first solo stage role was of the Swan
Queen, and her swansong to her most famous profession was a primary
role in The Actress, choreographed for her by James Kudelka. During a
remarkably long 28-year career in her profession she accumulated a
repertoire that included all major full-length ballerina roles,
including Aurora and Giselle. For 10 points, name this former Prima
and current Artistic Director of the National Ballet of Canada.
Fantaisie-Impromptu, Op. 66  LY This piano composition was written in
C-sharp minor, beginning with a two-bar sforzando octave on the
dominant note and leading to two bars of unaccompanied arpeggios on
the tonic in the left hand. Many  cross-rhythms are used in the first
section, which was written in cut time and marked “Allegro agitato”.
The left hand plays a series of sextuplets while the right hand plays
the melody in sixteenth notes. Two bars marked “Largo” indicate the
transition of the piece to the middle section in common time and in D
flat major. The melody of the middle section, marked “Moderato
cantabile”, was used in the song “I’m  Always Chasing Rainbows”. For
10 points, name this piano composition originally composed by Chopin
and published posthumously against his wishes by Julian Fontana. error
correction [prompt on “error detection”; accept fault tolerance though
it isn’t exactly the same thing; accept word forms]  HZ Quantumly,
this action can be performed by a method involving mapping qubits to
the +1 eigenspace of tensor products of Pauli matrices and measuring
the generators of the stabilizer of those operators. A theorem by
Shannon gives an upper bound on the efficiency of this action, and the
Viterbi algorithm can be used to perform this action when used with
convolutional codes. One method for doing this uses calculations over
a Galois field to encode and decode data. That is the Reed-Solomon
method, while a less effective method for doing this simply introduces
redundancy in data. For 10 points, checksums can help with performing
what operation through which a system attempts to recover from
corrupted data? Ernst Theodor Amadeus Hoffman  HZ Master Abraham
connects the two parts of one novel by this author, in which the title
feline’s reminiscences are intercut with the biography of Johannes
Kreisler. Another novel by this author contains a hairdresser with two
personalities, known alternately as Peter Schoenfeld and Pietro
Bellocampo, who tries to save the monk Medardus from the title
substance. This author of The Life and Opinions of the Tomcat Murr
and The Devil’s Elixirs, also wrote a story in which one character
screams, “Pretty eyes! Pretty eyes!” before jumping off a balcony to
his death. That character is engaged to Clara but is enchanted by the
automaton Ophelia and becomes deranged when he believes a barometer
salesman to be the title figure. For 10 points, name this German
author of “The Sandman”. congenital insensitivity to pain with
anhidrosis or CIPA  or hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy
type IV or HSAN IV  KV This autosomal recessive disorder is caused by
a genetic mutation in the neurotrophic tyrosine kinase receptor, or
NTRK1 gene, which is a receptor for nerve growth factor. That mutation
leads to defective nerve function in patients with this disorder that
often includes features such as chronic bone and joint infection,
fractures, and scarring of the tongue, lips and gums. There are
currently no known cures or treatments for this disorder, though
naloxone is now being used experimentally. People with this disorder
rarely pass age 25, often due to their inability to sweat, which leads
to the development of hypothermia. For 10 points, name this rare
nervous system disorder in which sufferers are unable to feel pain.
Serqet  AR This goddess narrates a story in which Isis tricks the sun-
god into revealing his secret name. In later years, the dominance of
the cult of Isis led to this goddess being regarded as merely an
aspect of Isis. This goddess was considered one of the protectors of
the dead because she was associated with the stiffening process of
embalming. This goddess, generally regarded as a goddess of healing,
was specifically associated with the curing of poisonous bites and
stings. Along with Nephthys, this goddess once convinced Isis to turn
to Ra for help in order to save Horus’ life. Because of her role in
protecting against poison, she is sometimes regarded as the goddess
who protected the rest of the deities from the snake-demon Apep. For
10 points, name this Egyptian goddess, the deification of the
scorpion. Franklin & Bash  KV Two characters from this series are put
on house arrest after having a duel with lightsabers in a courtroom.
Those lightsabers were collectibles belonging to another character,
whose agoraphobia leads his boss to recommend him to a therapist later
charged with fraud for impersonating a psychiatrist. That boss is
himself tried for murdering his best friend while on a mountaineering
expedition, but is acquitted of those charges on a basis of self-
defense. Stanton Infeld recruits the two main characters to the law
firm of Infeld & Daniels at the beginning of this series. For 10
points, name this series titled after two unconventional lawyers who
believe you can make a party out of anything, even jury selection.
keeping it real  HZ This phrase titles a novel about a cyborg named
Lila Black assigned to protect an Elven rock star, the first book in
Justina Robson’s Quantum Gravity series. “Mama Please” and “Broken
Wings” are two songs off of the C-Block album of this name, while in a
scene in Clueless, Dion’s boyfriend offers this phrase as his reason
for shaving all his hair off at a party. Skits such as one in which
Brenda Johnson receives a wrong number call and mistakenly assumes the
caller to be fooling around with her boyfriend were part of a segment
introduced in the second season of Chappelle’s Show, cautioning
against this idea, titled “When [this phrase]  Goes Wrong”. For 10
points, give this phrase, the title of Al Sharpton’s radio show, which
refers to a person’s desire to stay true to oneself. stonewalling  KV
In his book, The Seven Principles of Making a Marriage Work, John
Gottman argues that while partners may think they are trying to be
neutral, doing this instead of acknowledging and showing concern for
complaints communicates distance and disapproval. This action is
characterized by silence, monosyllabic speech, changes of subject, and
physical removal of self. In addition to criticism, defensiveness, and
contempt, for 10 points, name this fourth “horseman of the apocalypse”
in Gottman’s relationship conflict theory, referring to an
individual’s lack of responsiveness as a reaction to conflict. Mohamed
{Morsi} He described Israel as “killers and vampires.” In 2007,
advocating for an Islamic future, he drafted his party’s model
platform that suggested only Muslim males could hold the presidency.
He also called for a Council of Scholars to advise Parliament. From
the eastern Nile Delta, he is believed to have served in the chemical
warfare unit and holds a Ph.D. in rocket engineering from the
University of Southern California. For ten points, name this Muslim
Brotherhood President of Egypt. Battle of {Chateauguay} On October 26,
1813, an American army of 4,000 men advancing on Montreal was
confronted at this event by a much smaller British force under Charles
de Salaberry. The British force was made up primarily of French-
speaking Voltigeurs who blew horns in the woods to fool the Americans
that they were far more numerous. Discouraged by the show of
resistance, the Americans retreated after only two hours. For ten
points, name this Lower Canada battle of the War of 1812, the first
battle where the British force was made up mostly of Canadians.
{Chinook} The South American Peregrino oilfield was previously known
by this name which it shares with a type of camper van and a dog breed
developed by Polar explorer Arthur Treadwell in the early 20th
century. It was the name of a University of Alberta checkers playing
computer program that could at best be played to a draw. In 2000, Ty
Inc. made a Beanie Baby by this name that was sold in Canada for three
months. The foehn winds of the same name likely inspired the name for
the Calgary shopping centre. For ten points, name this common name
shared by the tribes of the lower and middle Columbia River, the King
Salmon and the Boeing CH-47 helicopter. 6\. He was criticized by
Ryerson University chair of the Centre for Indigenous Governance
Pamela Palmater for his close relationship with Stephen Harper and was
criticized in general by eastern chiefs for his limited focus on
treaty rights from the numbered treaties. Despite these criticisms,
Ovide Mercredi, The South American Peregrino oilfield was previously
known by this name which it shares with a type of camper van and a dog
breed developed by Polar explorer Arthur Treadwell in the early 20th
century. It was the name of a University of Alberta checkers playing
computer program that could at best be played to a draw. In 2000, Ty
Inc. made a Beanie Baby by this name that was sold in Canada for three
months. The foehn winds of the same name likely inspired the name for
the Calgary shopping centre. For ten points, name this common name
shared by the tribes of the lower and middle Columbia River, the King
Salmon and the Boeing CH-47 helicopter. Rosalind {Franklin} Largely
unacknowledged in 1962 when collaborators Wilkins, Watson and Crick
won the Nobel Prize in medicine, this English biophysicist and x-ray
crystallographer recognized the A and B forms of DNA and discovered
that the phosphate group must lie on the outside of the structure. Her
X-ray diffraction studies which showed Watson and Crick’s original
model to be wrong. Along with Wilkins she demonstrated that the double
helix model later found to be correct was consistent with the data.
For ten points, name this 20th century female scientist best known for
her x-ray diffraction images of DNA which led to the discovery of the
DNA double helix. {Luca Brasi} According to a story told to Kay Adams
at Connie’s wedding, he played a key role in releasing Johnny Fontane
from his personal service contract with bandleader Les Halley. After
interacting with him, Halley took less money than he was offered a day
earlier to release Fontane from his contract and chose to put his
signature on the contract instead of his brains. He personally thanked
the father of the bride for inviting him to that wedding. After
pretending to be disloyal, his bulletproof vest and a fish are sent to
the family of his Don. For ten points, name this Corleone enforcer
portrayed by Lenny Montana whose actions allowed an offer to be made
that couldn’t be refused but eventually slept with the fishes. Will
{Kymlicka} He divides his study of the just treatment of minority
groups into two groups – immigrants and national minorities, such as
the Maori or Quebecois. His liberal framework guides his work in that
area, as well as on human rights where he defines good and bad group
rights and their impact on individuals. For ten points, name this
Canadian political philosopher who is the author of Contemporary
Political Philosophy and Multicultural Citizenship. {Nauru} This
country, with no military, has 90% unemployment and went from being
flush with phosphate wealth into the 1980s, including once owning the
tallest building in Melbourne. Since then, this tiny island nation,
with the second smallest population of any country in the world, has
at different times attempted serving as a tax haven and money
laundering jurisdiction, processing Australian migrants, and reputedly
switching UN votes and country recognitions, in order to fund the
government in, for ten points, its capital Yaren. {R.U.R.} or
{Rossum’s Universal Robots} Beginning in a factory that makes
artificial people made of synthetic matter, they are similar to what
we might call androids. Titular characters eventually rebel and
exterminate humanity. Its author realized he had created a modern
version of the Golem legend after completing the manuscript. For ten
points, name this 1920 Karel Čapek play that coined the term robot.
14\. This work, the first part of the Portrait Trilogy, had its
Canadian Beginning in a factory that makes artificial people made of
synthetic matter, they are similar to what we might call androids.
Titular characters eventually rebel and exterminate humanity. Its
author realized he had created a modern version of the Golem legend
after completing the manuscript. For ten points, name this 1920 Karel
Čapek play that coined the term robot. {Loch Ness monster} or {Nessie}
In 1934, it was famously photographed by British physician R. Kenneth
Wilson. The earliest known description dates from AD 565 and sightings
increased in the 1930s when a new highway made its home more
accessible to travelers. In 1960, Tim Dinsdale made a short film of
its dark shape moving through water. Sonar has confirmed large moving
bodies at its namesake site. For ten points, name this creature that
may live in a lake in northern Scotland. {Tay-Sachs} disease or {GM2}
gangliosidosis or {hexosaminidase A deficiency} Its most common
variant causes a progressive deterioration of mental and physical
abilities that commence around six months of age and usually ends in
death by age four. Long associated with Ashkenazi Jews, it also
disproportionately affects Irish, French Canadians, and Cajun
populations. Occurring when harmful quantities of cell membrane
components known as gangliosides accumulate in the brain’s nerve
cells, eventually leading into the cells premature death. For ten
points, name this autosomal recessive genetic disorder. {Belize City}
This city’s National Stadium was renamed the Marion Jones Sports
Complex. Despite steroid allegations, the stadium’s name has not been
switched back. After almost being entirely destroyed by Hurricane
Hattie in 1961, it took nine years to relocate the capital to
Belmopan. For ten points, name this former capital of British Honduras
that is located on the mouth of a river of the same name. {Multiple
sclerosis} or {MS} Characterized by the gradual destruction of myelin,
it afflicts more women than men. Plaquez, small hard areas, appear
throughout the myelin and interfere with the normal function of nerve
pathways. Symptoms include double and can develop into partial loss of
vision. For ten points, name this disease of the nervous system whose
treatment can include liberation therapy in certain jurisdictions. Sir
Tom {Stoppard} [or Tomas {Straussler}] This playwright wrote of Henry,
who describes a bitter marriage between Max and Charlotte in the play-
within-a-play, House of Cards.  One of his plays opens with a 13-year-
old girl asking for a definition of “carnal embrace” and contains
characters like Thomasina.  In another work, Claudius and Gertrude
have trouble distinguishing between the two title characters, who open
the play by repeatedly flipping coins.  For 10 points, who wrote
Arcadia and Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead? Relational
{Database}s Dependencies in these entities are described via
Armstrong’s axioms.  A prohibition of subversion is the final of the
twelve Codd rules governing these entities.  Isolation and Atomicity
are two of the four ACID rules that govern transitions in these
entities.  They are often implemented using B-Trees, and it’s common
to call stored procedures to read from their tables. For 10 points,
name these objects for storing and retrieving large amounts of data,
often queried using the SQL language. {Calgary}, Alberta A prominent
event in this city was founded in 1912 by Guy Weadick.  Some suburbs
of this city have bumped up against land owned by the Tsuu T’ina
Nation.  A prominent building in this city was originally named for
Husky Energy, and many of its high-end restaurants are found along
Stephen Avenue. It was originally a Mountie Station called Fort
Brisebois, and this city is on the confluence of the Elbow and Bow
rivers.  For 10 points, name this largest city in Alberta. West {Wind}
A woman grasps the bare chest of a man in an Oskar Kokoschka painting
titled Bride of [this phenomenon], and a Greek god of this phenomenon
crowns Flora in a Tiepolo painting.  In another work, a god of this
domain is held onto by a golden-haired nude and points his mouth in
the direction of the title figure, who stands on a shell.  A tree on a
lake is affected by this title phenomenon in a painting by Jack Pine
artist Tom Thomson.  For 10 points, name this phenomenon represented
in The Birth of Venus by Zephyr. {Compton} scattering [or {Compton}
effect] One form of this process is responsible for the Sunyaev-
Zel'dovich effect, while its so-called y-parameter can be used to
identify galaxy clusters.  It was first identified in 1922 using a
molybdenum source, a block of graphite and a Bragg interferometer. It
reduces to classical Thomson scattering for massive targets, while it
corresponds to classical Rayleigh scattering in the long-wavelength
limit. For 10 points, name this process in which an X-ray or gamma ray
scatters off an electron resulting in a change in wavelength. People’s
Republic of {China} The protagonist of one novel set in this country
gets investments from men like “Yanker” and “Popsicle”, and once spies
on women’s bottoms in a bathroom. This country is the setting of
Brothers and Chronicle of a Blood Merchant.  A Nobel-winner from this
country wrote Buying a Fishing Rod for My Grandfather and told of
characters like “she”, “you” and “I” in Soul Mountain.  For 10 points,
name this country, the setting of Outlaws of the Marsh. {Radiohead
Concerts} [or {Radiohead Shows} or other synonyms for concerts] These
events are partially organized by the Ticker Tape company.  In a
recent Slate article, the film Meeting People is Easy was used to
argue that these events should end.  In 2007, Jonny Greenwood said he
wanted to reduce the carbon footprint of these events.  Scott Johnson
was killed prior to one of these events when scaffolding collapsed at
Downsview Park in Toronto.  They usually do not feature performances
of “Creep”.  For 10 points, name these events where songs from Kid A
or OK Computeri might be played. {Bear}s One of these animals
outlasted a tiger in becoming human, giving birth to Dangun, the first
Korean ruler, and they were sacrificed in the Iomante ritual of the
Ainu people.  One of these animals is almost killed by her son Arcas
in Greek mythology and was named Callisto.  Hunters are sometimes
helped by one of these animals in Inuit mythology named Nanook.  For
10 points, name these creatures, three of whom are visited by
Goldilocks. {Beginners} The protagonist of this film spray paints
“George Bush Finds Jesus 1985” onto a wall and works on a series
called “The History of Sadness”.  Mélanie Laurent’s character first
appears at a costume party dressed as Sigmund Freud. One character in
this film hosts a movie night on Harvey Milk, and finds companionship
with Andy before dying of lung cancer.  For 10 points, name this 2011
film where Ewan McGregor’s father, played by Christopher Plummer,
comes out of the closet. Christopher Eric {Hitchens} One essay by this
writer controversially questioned “Why Women aren’t Funny”, and he
wrote Letters to a Young Contrarian.  His The Trial of Henry Kissinger
elicited a response from that diplomat, and his brother Peter is a
columnist for The Mail on Sunday.  While on assignment for Vanity Fair
in 2008, this member of the “Four Horsemen of New Atheism” willingly
underwent waterboarding.  For 10 points, name this recently departed
journalist who wrote God is Not Great. {Orpheus} [or {Orfeo}] In one
opera, he sings the aria “Possente spirto, e formidabil nume” in an
attempt to put another figure to sleep.  He is issued a warning by the
counter-tenor Ascalax in an opera about the “Marvelous Constancy of
Love” by Telemann.  Alice Munro’s Dance of the Happy Shades comes from
a Christoph Gluck opera about this figure.  Subject of an early opera
by Monteverde, for 10 points, name this figure from Greek mythology
who tries to retrieve Eurydice from the underworld. {Somalia} Affair
B.J. Macdonald was accused of playing his Game Boy during this event,
and Kyle Brown failed to hang himself in the aftermath of this
scandal.  Jean Boyle interfered with Michael McAuliffe’s investigation
of this scandal, which saw Shidane Arone falsely accused of sabotage
for stealing a helicopter fuel pump.  An inquiry into it was opened by
the Chretien government.  For 10 points, name this 1993 scandal where
Canadian peacekeeping forces killed a teenager in the namesake African
country. {Swann} Morton Jimroy is one of the scholars attending a
conference on a poet with this last name in a Carol Shields mystery.
A stockbroker with this surname marries a woman who resembles a woman
in Botticelli’s Jethro’s Daughter named Odette de Crecy, who is the
mother of Gilberte.  A path with this name is an alternative a path
named for the Guermantes family.  For 10 points, give this last name
of a character who identifies the first volume of Marcel Proust’s In
Search of Lost Time. (David) Emile {Durkheim} In one work, this man
declared that “crime brings together upright consciences and
concentrates them”.  One of his works proposed the concepts of
mechanical and organic solidarity.  This man attempted to establish
his discipline as scientific by proposing material and nonmaterial
“social facts” in his The Rules of the Sociological Method.  In one
work, he divided the title concept into egoistic and anomic types.
For 10 points, name this French sociologist who wrote Suicide and The
Division of Labor in Society. Oil {Pipeline} [or Natural Gas
{Pipeline}] An important Eurasian one of these entities is known as
the “Friendship” or “Druzhba” one.  The documentary Wiebo’s War
chronicles the bombing of one of these entities in British Columbia.
Examples of these entities in the United States include the Big Inch.
President Obama announced a delay on the approval of one of these
entities until 2013; that example connects Hardisty to Houston and is
named the Keystone XL.  For 10 points, name these objects used for
transferring fossil fuel. {dengue} [or {dandy fever}; accept
{breakbone fever} before mentioned] Oxitec is promoting OX513A, a
genetically modified form of this disease’s vector that sterilizes the
population.  People suffering from this malady have a propensity to
develop antibody dependent enhancement.  Its alternative name comes
from the joint stiffness it causes, which eventually leads to its
namesake shock syndrome.  It’s not malaria or yellow fever, but it is
mainly spread by the Aedes aegypti mosquito.  For 10 points, name this
malady, also known as breakbone fever. The {Stranger} [or The
{Outsider} or L’{Etranger}] Matthew Ward adopted an “American method”
when translating this work, whose protagonist is taught to spit out
foam from the ocean by his love interest.  Thomas Perez joins its
protagonist in the opening scene, and it’s partially set in Celeste’s
restaurant.  Its hero tells a chaplain he doesn’t believe in God and
earlier shoots a man who harassed his friend Raymond on an Algerian
beach.  Beginning with the line “Maman died today”, for 10 points,
name this Albert Camus novel. {Huguenots} [accept {French Protestants}
before the end of the question] Jean a Lasco led a group of these
people to England, attracted by a charter issued by Edward VI.
Several of these people were killed in the Massacre of Vassy, which
preceded the Edict of Amboise.  These people were promised exemption
from military service and taxation via the Edict of Potsdam, and were
massacred after an assassination attempt on Gaspard de Coligny.
Henry IV granted them certain freedoms in the Edict of Nantes.  For 10
points, name this group of French protestants. {Neoplatonism} Marsilio
Ficino translated the major text of this school into Latin in 1492, a
text divided into six sections that outlines the principles of the
Soul, the Intellect and the One.  E. R. Dodds offered a definitive
commentary of Elements of Theology, a work by a late member of this
school named Proclus. Porphyry wrote a preface to the Enneads, the
major text of this school’s founder.  For 10 points, name this
philosophical school founded by Plotinus that offered interpretations
of texts like Phaedo and The Republic. Chinese {Civil Servants} [or
people who have passed the Chinese {Civil Service} exam; accept
equivalents like Chinese {Bureaucrats} before mentioned; prompt on
first sentence buzzes of “The Chinese”] People who failed to achieve
the highest form of this status could still become a “cultivated
talent” or a “recommended man” but had failed to master techniques
like amplification and crafting the final argument in the eight-
legged essay.  To achieve this status, one could master the Six Arts
in a university established by Wudi and gain knowledge of the Nine
Confucian Classics.  For 10 points, name this status bestowed on
people who passed the difficult Imperial Examination in China. The
{Feminine Mystique} Leslie Bennetts punned on the title of this work
in a 2007 book that asked, “Are We Giving Up Too Much?”  This book
contains a chapter on Freud's “sexual solipsism” and criticizes his
notion of penis envy as being tied to Victorian mores. This book
tackles the so-called “problem without a name” and stemmed from a
survey of graduates from the author’s alma mater of Smith College.
For 10 points, name this foundational text of the second-wave feminism
movement by Betty Friedan. {Areopagitica} (also accept: Areopagitica:
A speech of Mr. John Milton for the liberty of unlicensed printing to
the Parliament of England) The author of this work intended it as a
response to the Licensing Order of 1643, which he claimed to be a
product of the Catholic machinations of the recently defunct Star
Chamber. Written during the English Civil War, it has been argued that
the author based his viewpoint on John 8:32, and this emboldened his
stand against perceived attempts by Parliament to censor writers and
stifle certain rights guaranteed by previous laws. In this work, the
author claims that books “contain a potency of life”, and that “he who
kills a good book, kills reason itself”. Taking as inspiration the
classical notions of freedom of publishing and freedom of speech, the
author, who is perhaps more famous for his poetry concerning the fall
of man and his eventual redemption, especially draws upon the writings
of the Athenian orator Isocrates. FTP, what is this polemical pamphlet
of John Milton, which takes its title from the hill in Athens that was
the site of tribunals which Isocrates wished to restore? {Atanarjuat}:
The Fast Runner Based off of an oral tradition almost 500 years old,
this movie begins with the song and spiritual duel between a shaman
and camp leader, who suddenly falls dead, thus initiating a curse
which will plague the camp with bad luck and ill-will for years. The
main character, who is the son of a man disgraced by the curse, wins
the right to marry his first wife via a head- punching duel at a
feast. However, this marriage is sullied by his acquisition of a
second wife while on the hunt, and after he beats her for not working
enough, she flees to his rival Oki, who vows revenge. Having gathered
a gang of allies, Oki attempts to murder the main character, although
he escapes from his tent naked and unharmed, and proceeds to outrun
them across the ice, even managing to leap across a broad hole with
help from the spirit of a man who will eventually help him to recover
in hiding. While away, Oki seizes leadership of the camp, but the main
character overpowers them, and Qulitalik defeats the shaman to restore
order in, FTP, what Inuit film about a legendary ‘fast runner’,
Canada’s top-grossing film for 2002? {London} dispersion {force} (also
accept: Instantaneous dipole-induced dipole force) This was first
described by its namesake in 1930, using a quantum mechanical theory
based on second-order perturbation theory. According to this
explanation, no intermolecular antisymmetrization of the electronic
states is included, and the Pauli exclusion principle is only
partially satisfied. Looking at the effects of this, it has been found
that although for highly polar molecular pairs such as H2O-H2O the
effect of this only accounts for 24% of the total energy interaction,
for the most part, as with HBr-HBr and Ne-Ne pairs, the effect of this
makes it the dominant of the three Van der Waals forces. This force is
present between all chemical groups, but is generally weaker than
ionic and hydrogen bonds; however, without this there would be no
attractive force between noble gas atoms. FTP, what is this type of
dispersion force that becomes stronger with increasing surface area, a
weak intermolecular force arising from quantum-induced instantaneous
polarization multipoles in molecules, named after a certain German-
American physicist? Jose de Sousa {Saramago} He self-identified as a
communist, an aetheist, and a pessimist, and part of his name was
apparently mistakenly added by the birth registrar. His short story
“The Tale of the Unknown Island” uses metaphor to convey themes of
discovery and criticism of bureaucracy, which are characteristic of
most of his works. In addition to short stories and poetry, such as
“The Year 1993”, he wrote plays that have yet to be translated into
English, such as One Night, and The Second Life of Francis of Assisi,
as well as a travel book about his home country. He is well-known in
his home country for novels including This World and the Other, The
Appointments, Handbook of Painting and Calligraphy, and The Little
Memories. FTP, who is this prolific author of peasant-birth, who won
the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1998, who is perhaps best-known for
his novels Cain, The Stone Raft, The Death of Ricardo Reis, and The
Gospel According to Jesus Christ? {Brittany} (also accept: Bertaeyn,
Bretagne; {Armorica} or {Breizh} before mentioned) Tribes who lived in
this region included the Osismii, Veneti, Coriosolites, Redones, and
Namnetes, and the late Roman magister militum Aetius apparently had
soldiers from this region fight with him against Atilla at the Battle
of Chalons. Its Gaulic name Aremorica most likely means “place by the
sea”, although human settlement in this region existed well before the
Gauls entered the area, as evidenced by such the megaliths found at
sites such as Carnac. This region’s fortified town of Saint-Malo was
the home and port- of-call of Jacques Cartier, as well as the first
colonists to settle the Falkland Islands, hence the French name “Iles
Malouines”. A tri-lingual region, it was united with the Kingdom of
France in 1532, although its current name is related to that of a
nearby island belonging to the United Kingdom. FTP, what is this
region of northwest France, home to such cities as Nantes, Rennes, and
Brest, the home of comic character Asterix, known in its native
language as Breizh? {Brachiopoda} Most species of this marine phylum
went extinct during the Permian- Triassic extinction event, and
although they possess both dorsal and ventral valves, they are not to
be confused with bivalve molluscs, which are arranged horizontally,
rather than vertically. Similar to molluscs, members of this phylum
have a mantle which encloses internal organs which also has
diverticula which may contribute to respiration. Members of this
phylum have what is known as a lophophore, which has ciliated
tentacles used for filtering food particles out of water. The most
distinctive feature of this phylum is the pedicle, which this phylum
uses to attach to the sea floor, although this is not functional in
some species. Most members of this phylum can repair themselves if
needed, although this is infrequent as apparently fish and crustaceans
find them distasteful. FTP, what is this marine phylum, home to the
inarticulate Lingula genus which has been described as a ‘living
fossil’, with a name coming from the Greek for “arm-foot”. {Papal
Infallibility} Scriptural support for this concept comes from such
readings as John 1:42, Mark 3:16, and Matthew 10:2, which refer to
Simon receiving a name related to the Greek word for ‘rock’.
Historical examples of this concept being exercised were the Bull Unam
Sanctam issued by Boniface VIII, the Bull Cantate Domino issued by
Eugene IV, and through the Papal constitution of Ineffabilis Deus,
promulgated by Pius IX. Related to this dogma are the concepts of
Sacred Scripture, Sacred Tradition, and Sacred Magisterium, which
consists of ecumenical councils and must be based off of the Sacred
Scripture and Sacred Tradition. In order for this dogma to be
recognized, certain formulas must be used to clarify the intent of a
teaching, and there must be an accompanying anathema. In particular,
this concept refers to teachings made ex cathedra, because the Pope is
said to occupy the chair of Peter. FTP, what is this Catholic dogma
that, supported by the primacy of the Roman pontiff, renders such
dogmas as Pius XII’s definition of the Assumption of Mary to be free
from even the possibility of error, although it does not guarantee
impeccability? {W}allace {Stevens} This man may have undergone
conversion to Roman Catholicism on his deathbed, although this has
been disputed by his daughter. Critic William York Tindall described
this author as a politically conservative Republican, and after
working as a lawyer for many years, only gradually took up poetry. The
literary critic Harold Bloom compared this poet to Sophocles,
referring to him as the quintessential American poet, in reference to
works like Harmonium. He wrote that “The poem must resist the
intelligence/ Almost successfully” when referring to the relationship
between consciousness and the world, and wrote “Poetry is the supreme
Fiction, madame” in his satirical poem “A High-Toned Old Christian
Woman”. FTP, who was this poet who allegedly broke his hand punching
Ernest Hemingway in the jaw, famous for works such as “The Idea of
Order at Key West”, “Thirteen Ways of Looking at a Blackbird”, and
“The Emperor of Ice Cream”? {Kangxi} (also accept: Qing Shengzu, Elhe
Taifin Huwangdi, Kangxidi) This ruler’s reign began under a succession
of four regents, Sonin, Ebilun, Sukasha, and Oboi, as well as under
the influence of his grandmother. One of the longest-reigning rulers
in history, this ruler was the first of his dynasty to be born south
of the Shanhai Pass, making him the first of the dynasty to live his
entire life at the imperial capital. A member of the Aisin-Gioro clan,
he inherited the task of his father, the Shunzhi Emperor, improving
infrastructure, consolidating rule, and suppressing revolt. Over the
course of his 61-year long reign, this emperor suppressed the Revolt
of the Three Feudatories, defeated and forced tribute from the Kingdom
of Tungning, halted Russian expansion at the Amur River, and compiled
a famous namesake dictionary. FTP, who was this 4th Qing emperor, who
initiated the period known as the “Prosperous Era of (this emperor)
and Qianlong”, considered one of China’s greatest rulers? {Quantum
Chromodynamics} (also accept: QCD) The invention of bubble chambers
and spark chambers led to the discovery of growing numbers of hadrons,
which could be classified according to charge and isospin by Wigner
and Heisenberg, and later to strangeness by Gell-Mann and Nishijima,
all of which seemed to indicate the existence of non- fundamental
particles that would need to be accounted for by a new theory;
discussion of this by Bogolyubov, Struminsky, and Tavchelidze set off
a flurry of debate and experimentation that would eventually lead to
this new theory. Although in some applications it eventually developed
into string theory, the S-matrix theory was abandoned in favour of
this non-Abelian gauge theory because of its ability to solve problems
of strong interactions within field theory. Describing properties of
confinement and asymptotic freedom, the study of which won Politzer,
Wilczek and Gross the 2004 Nobel Prize in Physics, this is, FTP, what
theory about a fundamental force which describes the interactions of
the quarks and gluons which make up hadrons such as the proton,
neutron, and pion? Robert W. {Service} One of this man’s poems,
written in a series of rhyming couplets, ends with the lines “O God,
in Thy great mercy, let us nevermore forget; The graves they left
behind, the bitter graves”, and was intended as an homage to British
victims of the 2nd Boer War. Another poem, written while working as a
store clerk in Cowichan Bay, dotes on the melodies of plants and trees
and how England shall “hearken, and she’ll understand”. Before moving
to the place for which this poet is most famous, he wrote a poem
presaging a place where, “When a man gits on his uppers in a hard-pan
sort of town…An’ he’s in a fix for a lodgin’ an’ he wanders up an’
down”, called The Little Old Log Cabin. Amid recitations of the poetry
of others, this poet began to be recognized for such works as The Call
of the Wild, thriller novels like The Roughneck, A Tale of Tahiti, and
eventually played himself in the movie The Spoilers. However, it is
for two certain poems for which he is most famous, including one about
the demise of a prospector after a piano-playing stranger arrives to
settle a grudge. FTP, who was this British poet of frontier poetry,
writer of such works as the Shooting of Dan McGrew, and The Cremation
of Sam McGee? {Broadway Boogie Woogie} Found in the MOMA, this piece
features a series of primary colours and shades arranged in contrast
to earlier works by the artist, such as The River Amstel. It is an oil
on canvas, 50x50”, and was the penultimate painting of its creator.
The painting was influenced by the syncopation, melodic freedom, and
improvisation of a certain music style that the artist encountered
upon fleeing Europe with the outbreak of World War II. Providing the
visual backdrop for this piece was the dynamic architecture of his
city of asylum, which contributed to the replacement of a black grid
with yellow lines intersecting with squares of blue and red, which
seem to emulate a street scene as viewed from an apartment suite. FTP,
what is this painting, which depicts an urban layout with the movement
of traffic, electric lights and jazz rhythms, one of the seminal works
of Dutch artist Piet Mondrian? 2nd {Battle of Kosovo} (also accept:
Masodik Rigomezei Csata; Ikinci Kosova Savasi) The victors in this
battle had numerical superiority at 2-to-1, as well as advance notice
of the impending attack and strategic tactical advice which came from
a rival of the leader of the attacking army. This rival, Durad
Brankovic, had earlier been accused of abandoning the Christian cause
by Skanderbeg of Albania, and had his lands ravaged; this action,
combined with his dislike of the Hungarian leader John Hunyadi, led to
Brankovic’s allegiance switching to the Ottomans. Hunyadi had
anticipated an uprising against Ottoman rule from across the Balkans,
and moved on through Serbia, past the capital Smederovo, unwilling to
wait for Skanderbeg and unable to gain support from Brankovic other
than free passage. Eventually Hunyadi arrived at Blackbird Field
accompanied by a force of Wallachians, who engaged the Ottomans under
Murad II and his son Mehmed. The Ottoman Rumelian and Anatolian forces
were losing until reinforced by Turkish light cavalry. The the
Janissaries proved their allegiance to Murad, and managed to ravage
Hunyadi’s retreating forces, opening the Balkans to Ottoman
domination. FTP, what was this battle, the 2nd to take place at a
certain Serbian principality centered on Pristina? {Serpents} (also
accept: Snakes, other serpent-like things) The Hopi perform an annual
dance inspired by this creature in order to renew the fertility of the
Earth, and the Magna Dei was often accompanied by these as familiar
spirits. The Dahomeyan god Danh took the form of this creature in
order to prevent the world from falling apart, and the legendary Fu
Xi, the first of the Three Sovereigns of ancient China, was often
depicted as having the body of this creature, as did his wife Nu Wa.
In 1931, Clyde Tombaugh discovered Pluto in the constellation known as
the bearer of this type of creature, and this constellation is often
referred to as the 13th of the zodiac. Illuyanka, Ophion, Damballa,
Coatlicue, Vritra, and Ogopogo all are, FTP, deities associated with
this type of creature believed by the ancients to be intelligent and
cunning due to their unblinking eyes, and which has often symbolised
the umbilical cord connecting humans to Mother Earth?
{Transcendentalism} Christopher Pearce Cranch was an artist and writer
associated with this school of thought, as was the author of what
critic James Russell Lowell called “the most emphatically American
book ever written”, Sylvester Judd. Early members of this school of
thought drew inspiration from such wide sources as German realists
like Fichte and Schelling, English romantics like Caspar David
Friedrich, and Vedic thought, particularly the Bhagavad Gita. The
short story “Never Bet the Devil Your Head” was a direct attack on
this school of thought, which was also satirized in The Blithedale
Romance. The 1836 essay “Nature” is generally considered to be the
spark for this movement, which although it began to die out by the
1850’s, experienced a second wave under such writers as Samuel
Longfellow, Franklin Benjamin Sanborn, and Octavius Brooks
Frothingham. FTP, what is this school of thought that is centered on
the belief that ideal spirituality can only be realized through one’s
intuition, represented famously by such figures as Emily Dickinson,
Margaret Fuller, Henry David Thoreau, and Ralph Waldo Emerson?
{Asthenosphere} The global existence of this feature was confirmed due
to analysis of earthquake waves caused by the Great Chilean Earthquake
of 1960, but it had been suspected since the 1920’s. Its name is a
compound that includes the Greek word for ‘weak’, due to its high
viscosity and high ductility. Seismic waves are believed to move
relatively slowly through this layer of the mantle, although it is not
to be confused with the Low-Velocity Zone, which does not penetrate as
deep. At mid-oceanic ridges, this layer may rise to within a few
kilometres of the ocean floor, although the base of this layer is most
likely about 700 km in depth. FTP, what is this layer of the upper
mantle, which is believed to cause the movement of crustal plates due
to the lithosphere floating on its highly ductile surface? {Pseudolus}
Its prologue is the shortest of any of its author’s known plays, but
there is uncertainty as to whether the author actually composed it or
whether it was added on later. This play is an example of ‘Palliata
comoedia’, a genre devised by Livius Andronicus, and like many of this
author’s plays contains an explicit stock character which is
characteristic of many of his other, less- complete plays. In this
play, Calidorus, the young son of an Athenian nobleman, laments to the
titular character that his love-interest Phoenicium has been sold as a
slave to the Macedonian general Polymachaeroplagides by the pimp
Ballio. Hilarity ensues as the titular character attempts to get the
girl for Calidorus, win a bet from Simo, and outwit half the town
while making preparations for his own birthday party. This play was
one of the major influences in the production of Sondheim’s A Funny
Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum. FTP, what is this comedy by
Roman playwright Plautus, which, like Miles Gloriosus and Mostellaria
features a stock character in the title character, who is described as
a ‘clever slave’, played by Zero Mostel in the movie adaptation of A
Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum? {Vladimir} Sviatoslavich
the Great (also accept: Volodymyr, Valdamarr Sveinaldsson) As prince
of Novgorod, this ruler was forced to flee to the court of his
relative Hakon Sigurdsson in Sweden after Yaropolk murdered Oleg and
conquered Rus. This ruler’s mother Malusha was described in various
Norse sagas as having been a prophetess who lived to the ripe old age
of 100, and had originally lived in a cave before being brought to the
court of Sviatoslav I. In order to gain the throne promised to this
ruler, he summoned a large band of Varangians from Scandanavia,
conquered Polotsk and slew its leader Rogvolod in order to take his
daughter Rogneda as his wife, and then took Smolensk before finally
submitting Kiev and murdering Yaropolk, his brother. As knyaz of Kiev,
he conquered what would become known as Galicia, subdued the
Yatvingians, conquered the Volga Bulgars, and attempted to establish
the primacy of Perun as supreme Slavic deity. FTP, who was this Grand
Prince of Kiev, who is credited with the ‘baptism of Russia’ after
envoys sent to experience the world’s religions were most impressed
with Constantinople as a city, who died mustering an army to punish
his insolent son Yaroslav the Wise? {Coral Castle }(accept Rock Gate
Park or Rock Gate) This locale was built as a residence by Latvian
American Edward Leedskalnin. Its location was moved in 1936 when
development around the structure made it so that it was no longer a
remote area. The motivation for its construction is thought to have
arisen as a memorial to Leedskalnin’s 16 year-old fiancée Agnus
Scuffs, who jilted him at one day prior to their wedding. This
residence took 28 years to build, and was done solely by the work of
Edward Leedskalnin himself, having claimed to constructed it using
magnetic currents and a “perpetual motion holder”. The locale itself
contains more than 1,000 tons of limestone quarried in South Florida,
and built just outside of Florida City. FTP name this castle on the
U.S. National Register of Historic Places featured on shows such as
That’s Incredible! And In Search of… known as much for its giant
obelisks and solid stone construction as it is for the mystery behind
its construction. {Magnetic Monopole} This particle was thought to be
discovered in condensed matter physics in the form of flux tubes, but
these were found not to be a true instance of this entity. Although
the existence of this particle has never been experimentally proven,
it has been predicted by both the grand unified and superstring
theories. Corresponding to the first Legendre Polynomial, this elusive
entity is theoretically nonexistent by Gauss’s law for magnetism. For
ten points, name this theoretical entity which can be thought of as
half of a bar magnet with a net magnetic charge. {The Magic
Mountain}(Der Zauberberg) One character in this novel is profoundly
stupid and her facial expression is described in terms of her “rodent-
like teeth.” Someone slamming doors irritates the main character, but
when he finds the culprit, he falls in love and has a dream in which
she loans him a pencil. The number seven is a recurring theme in this
book and the last name of the main character's mentor has the Italian
word for seven in his name. That character, Settembrini, repeatedly
advises Hans Castorp to leave the title location in, For 10 points,
what novel set in a Swiss sanitorium by Thomas Mann? {Speciation} One
criterion for identifying products of this process differentiates
between pre-zygotic and post-zygotic isolation. In plants this process
commonly occurs by polyploidy, which is more rapid than other types of
this process. The sympatric form of this process can occur via
disruptive selection when populations are not in geographic isolation,
while the closing of the Isthmus of Panama led to the allopatric type
of this process. This process can also occur via hybridization when
two populations interbreed. For 10 points, name this process by which
new classes of organisms are formed. {The Awakening} At one point the
protagonist of this novel confides in her friend that she would be
willing sacrifice her material belongs and her life for her children
but that she could not give up herself. This conversation occurs just
after a man leaves suddenly for business in Mexico, upsetting the
protagonist of the novel with his hasty departure. A friend of the
protagonist, Mademoiselle Reisz, is known for her gifted piano playing
and the violets she puts in her hair. For 10 points, this is what
novel in which Edna Pontellier’s affair with Robert leads to her self-
realization and demise, written by Kate Chopin? {Halo} effect or error
In 2010 Bechger, Maris, and Hsiao suggested that this phenomenon might
best be avoided in language examinations by randomly assigning raters
to particular task and exam-taker combinations rather than to exam-
takers. The Economist claims car companies take advantage of this
effect by selling special high-end cars alongside cheaper models. For
ten points, name this psychological phenomenon coined in 1920 by
Thorndike, which explains why military officers were rated either
highly or lowly across the board by a superior. the {Black} Sea A
paper published in 2006 claimed that if an asteroid were to strike
this body of water, the release of toxic and flammable gases could be
more dangerous than the resulting tsunami. One of its official
boundaries is a line joining Cape Takil and Cape Panaghia, and it is
skirted by the Kolkhida lowlands to the east. Its largest islands are
Fidonisi and Berezan. An eponymous fleet won a battle at Sinope on its
coastline, destroying a Turkish fleet. For ten points, name this sea,
connected to the seas of Azoz, Marmara, and the Mediterranean.
Giuseppe {Garibaldi} This person voyaged to Russia on the schooner
Clorinda before participating in a failed insurrection led by members
of a Carbonari movement. While campaigning with a group of rebels
called the Ragamuffins, this man met his future wife, with whom he
fought at the battles of Laguna and Imbituba. Later, this general
formed the unit the Hunters of the Alps and battled against the
Austrians in the Second Italian War of Independence. For 10 points,
name this general and leader of the Redshirts who fought for the
unification of Italy. Wilkie{ Collins} In one of this author’s novels
Rachel Verinder inherits a sacred Indian diamond from her uncle, which
is promptly stolen from her. In another novel the uncle of one of the
main characters frequently remarks how proud he is to be in the
possession of a collection of Rembrandt etchings. The niece of this
man is one of the victims of a conspiracy orchestrated by Sir Percival
Glyde and Count Fosco, eventually unraveled by the efforts of Walter
Hartright. For 10 points name this author of The Moonstone and The
Woman in White. {Kim Jong-Il} In 2001 this man’s son was caught trying
to enter Japan with a forged Chinese passport to visit Disneyland.
This man’s father founded Juche, a political philosophy that replaced
Marxism in the country that he led. A popular Tumblr blog features
photos of this man looking at things, who has been referred to as
supreme leader, ‘our father,’ ‘the General,’ and many others. Asian
stock markets fell following his death in late 2011, while the South
Korean military was put on alert. For 10 points, name this dearly
departed former leader of North Korea Ellen {Page} An early film role
for this actress saw her character Sherry become a member of a cult
while homeless in Europe. Internet predator Jeff is convinced to
commit suicide by another character played by this actress. As Bliss
Cavendar this actress embarrasses her mother by dying her hair blue
for a beauty pageant and acts alongside Jennifer Garner and Jason
Bateman in another film. In addition to her roles in Hard Candy and
Whip It, she plays a maze designer in Inception. For 10 points
identify this Canadian actress, best known for her role as the titular
character in Juno. Saul {Bellow} In one collection by this author, a
character uses a Goya painting as a description of his self-image as
he attempts to apologize to a former acquaintance for past
wrongdoings. In addition to Him with His Foot in His Mouth, this man
also wrote a story that alludes to his relationship with the poet
Delmore Schwartz. In that novel, the title character's mentorship
provides another character with the basis to write a successful play.
For 10 points, name the author of such works as Humboldt's Gift and
Henderson the Rain King. {Loki} Earthquakes are attributed to the
painful convulsions of this god. In an attempt to save his life, this
god took the form of a fly to annoy the dwarf forging Mjolnir. His
attempts to distract have limited success; however, Eitri and Brokk
still win the wager and his head. After an angry tirade, this god was
imprisoned in a cave with a snake dripping venom onto his face. This
god is father to several children through his wife Angrboda, including
the wolf Fenrir. For ten points, name this trickster God of Norse
mythology. Mitt {Romney} Born in Michigan, this man’s career would
take him to the East Coast, where he would lose the 1994 Senate race
to Ted Kennedy. This man’s father lost the presidential nomination to
Richard Nixon in 1968, although ended up serving in his cabinet. This
man was responsible for signing into law the Massachusetts Healthcare
Reform. Although starting out working for Boston Consulting Firm, this
man would go on to found Bain Capital. For ten points, name this
Republican politician and presumptive nominee to run against Barack
Obama. Toyotomi {Hideyoshi} Distressed that he lacked an heir after
his first son Tsurumatsu died, this man appointed his nephew to the
task – but, after the birth of his second son, he forced his nephew to
perform seppuku, in addition to publicly executing his children and 31
female relatives. To enforce class separation, he oversaw the
gathering and melting down of swords from the peasant class. His later
military aspirations to invade Korea and China were foiled by a defeat
at sea in 1592; but he had largely completed the unification that his
former lord Oda Nobunaga had begun. For ten points, name this Japanese
leader who paved the way for the peaceful Tokugawa era. continuity or
continuous or continuousness, etc. Picard’s existence theorem for
first-order differential equations requires that the function y-prime
be Lipschitz-this in y. The Blancmange function has this property
everywhere in its domain. The modified Dirichlet function, which is 0
for argument irrational and 1 over b for argument rational of reduced
form a over b, has this property only at irrational inputs. A mapping
is this if the preimage of every open set in its codomain is open. For
ten points, name this mathematical property, often defined for
functions in terms of a pointwise epsilon-delta argument. {Wales}
[Cymru (koom-ree)] The border between this country and its neighbor is
largely based on the boundaries of medieval Marcher lordships and at
one point separates a city from its railroad station. It’s known as
the “land of song” partly due to its eisteddfod (eye-steth-vod)
tradition, and the Seven Wonders of this country include some ancient
yew trees and the region’s highest mountain, Snowdon. Many citizens
speak both English and Cymraeg (koom-raig) and it is home to the
longest official place name in the UK. For 10 points, name this polity
with capital at Cardiff. Igor {Stravinsky} Theodor Adorno criticized
this man’s work as too repetitive, although Bernstein spoke highly of
one of his pieces. This man came to fame after Sergei Diaghilev
commissioned him to compose a set of ballets, one of which was
featured in Fantasia and accompanied depictions of the origin of life.
However, Fantasia’s version cut the Finale of the second act and
repeated the bassoon solo at the end of the piece. In another of this
man’s ballets, Prince Ivan must free the maidens from the evil
Katschai with help from the titular creature. For 10 points, name this
composer of The Firebird and The Rite of Spring. {Charles}{II} (or
Carlos II) This monarch ruled Spain and its overseas empire during the
late 17th century and created a Junta Magna to investigate the Spanish
Inquisition, although he may be better known for his intense physical
and intellectual disabilities that arose from the excessive European-
style inbreeding of his ancestors. For 10 points:      A. Who was this
king, the successor to Philip IV and the last Habsburg ruler of Spain?
The {sun} (sol) Make sure that your optical cables are all securely
attached before answering these questions about neutrinos:         A.
Neutrinos come in three flavors: electron, muon, and tau- but they can
oscillate between flavors as they travel. Neutrino oscillation was
hinted at when scientists observed fewer electron neutrinos than they
expected coming from this object, whose PP and PEP reactions produce
huge numbers of the particles Jane {Austen} This author created a
character who is engaged to James Martin but marries a man being
pursued by her mother despite the latter's relationship with
Manwaring. In one of this author's novels, a character rushes off to
write a letter to the protagonist after the latter insists that women
do not forget men as easily as men do women in a conversation with
Captain Harville.  That letter leads the protagonist to reconcile with
a man who she rejected nine years earlier at the wishes of her father
Walter.  In another novel by this author of Lady Susan, Isabella
Thorpe pursues the eldest son of the family inhabiting the title
location, whose resemblance to a gothic castle delights the Ann
Radcliffe-obsessed protagonist.  For 10 points, name this author who
wrote about Anne Elliot in Persuasion and Catherine Morland in
Northanger Abbey. Paul’s {first} letter to the {Corinthians} [or {1
Corinthians}] One verse in this book praises Stephanas, Fortunatus and
Achaicus for their faith, while the fifteenth chapter of this book
quotes Hosea 13 by asking "where, oh death, is your sting?" That
chapter in this book is often read on Easter Sunday, as the author
assures that "...you are saved, if you hold firmly to the word I
preached to you" with respect to the fact that "Christ has indeed been
raised from the dead."  This book's thirteenth chapter is
traditionally read at weddings and begins "love is patient, love is
kind and is not jealous." That chapter later states that "when I was a
child, I talked like a child" but "when I became a man, I put childish
ways behind me." For 10 points, name this Pauline epistle, the first
written to the church of a certain Greek city. {Banff National Park}
[prompt on “Banff” before “which national park” at the end, accept
afterwards] In 1917, elk from Yellowstone National Park were
introduced to this site. However, a predator-control program allowed
the elk population to expand, and native species such as the moose and
bighorn sheep had their territory encroached. This site originated
with a cave containing hot springs, discovered by three Canadian
Pacific Railway workers. That cave was later named Cave and Basin.
Today, this site features attractions such as Peyto Lake, the Whyte
Museum, Castleguard Cave, the Icefields Parkway, and Lake Louise.
Bordered by Jasper National Park on the north, Yoho National Park on
the west, and Kootenay National Park on the south, this is, for 10
points, which national park located in Alberta's Rockies, the oldest
in Canada? {Apartheid} One piece of legislation under this policy was
the Natives Resettlement Act which relocated citizens from a town that
was renamed Triomf.  A speech condemning this policy mentions that a
“growth of national consciousness is a political fact” and that the
title entity is “blowing through this continent.” That speech was
delivered by Harold Macmillan.  Pass books used as part of this policy
resulted in the killing of 69 people in the Sharpesville massacre. A
future president of the country associated with this policy was
imprisoned at Robben Island for eighteen years as a result of his work
with the ANC.  For 10 points, name this policy ended following
negotiations between F.W. De Klerk and Nelson Mandela, a system of
racial segregation in South Africa. {Photosynthesis} [accept {C4}
photosynthesis in the first sentence] In one variation of this
process, PEP carboxylase facilitates a reaction to produce
oxaloacetate, which is converted to malate and transferred to bundle
sheath cells for further reactions. In another variation, the produced
malate is stored for later use. Those two variations alleviate the
problem where oxygen, instead of carbon dioxide, binds to rubisco. In
this process, the first stage produces ATP and NADPH, while the second
stage produces glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate. Those stages are called the
light and dark reactions. C4 and CAM also perform carbon fixation in,
for 10 points, which process that uses light energy to convert carbon
dioxide and water into sugar and oxygen? {Wives} of {Henry VIII}
[prompt on partial answer; accept clear knowledge equivalents] The
penultimate person with this distinction lost it after John Lascelles
revealed secret meetings between her and Thomas Culpeper.  Those
meetings were arranged by Lady Rochford, the sister-in-law of a
previous person with this distinction.  That previous person's
childhood home, Heber Castle, was given to the fourth person with this
distinction after she lost this distinction. The Third Succession Act
restored two women to a line of succession headed by Edward VI, the
son of the third woman with this distinction.  Sir Thomas More was
executed after refusing to support an annulment from Catherine of
Aragon, the first of, for 10 points, what group of six spouses of a
certain Tudor king? The {Firebird} [or L’{Oiseau De Feu}] In 1970,
Maurice Bejart used this ballet's score to choreograph a work in which
Michael Denard donned a notably bright red costume as a French
revolutionary.  The composer's suite for this ballet includes a
scherzo that accompanies a dance by thirteen princesses playing a game
with golden apples. The grand finale of this ballet depicts the fall
of the antagonist inside his palace when his subjects are forced to
dance themselves to sleep by the title character.  That title
character of this ballet then instructs the protagonist to smash an
egg containing Kashchei’s soul.  For 10 points, name this Stravinsky
ballet in which prince Ivan defeats Kashchei after freeing a mythical,
avian creature. {Polymers} The stabilization of these entities against
weathering can be explained by the formation of nitroxyl radicals
through the Denisov cycle.  The Carothers equation can be used to
calculate the average of these entities’ namesake degree in one
process for creating these compounds.  The dissimilarity in molecule
sizes for these compounds, whose architectures include star, comb and
brush, in solution can be solved mathematically using Flory Huggins
solution theory.  Another mechanism for the creation of these
compounds is the addition, or chain-growth, mechanization which
consists of propagation, elongation and termination steps.  For 10
points, name these compounds consisting of repeating monomer subunits.
John {Keats} One poetic reference to this man describes his mind as
being "snuffed out by an article" found in the Quarterly Review. This
poet wrote about a girl who "seem'd a splendid angel, newly drest /
Save wings, for Heaven" and her lover, who hides in a closet until she
goes to sleep; these are Madeline and Porphyro. One of this poet's
other works concludes with the narrator "Still, still to hear her
tender-taken breath, / And so live ever - or else swoon to death," and
is addressed to a "Bright star, would I were steadfast as thou art."
This poet mentions that "Yet did I never breathe its pure serene /
Till I heard Chapman speak out loud and bold" about Homer. For 10
points, name this Romantic poet whose works include The Eve of St.
Agnes, Bright Star, and On First Looking into Chapman's Homer. The
{English Patient} One character in this novel abandons a dance party
when the smell of cordite leads him to discover the death of Sam
Hardy.  Another character in this novel's use of the names Cicero,
Zerzura, and Delilah leads him to believe that yet another character
aided a German named Eppler.  That character in this novel uses the
word Bosphorus to refer to the cleft in Katherine Clifton’s throat
and, after discovering her dead in Swimmer's Cave, gets into a plane
that goes up in flames.  That title character of this novel eventually
ends up in an abandoned Italian villa where he is cared for by the
Canadian nurse Hana.  The thief Caravaggio seeks to reveal that Almasy
is not actually the title nationality in, for 10 points, what 1992
novel by Michael Ondaatje? George Frideric {Handel} In an opera by
this composer, one character pretends to sleep-talk to her beloved in
order to expose the title character's plotting. That opera was written
during this composer's early years in Italy, where he also wrote La
resurrezione and the opera Rodrigo. After his years in Italy, he also
wrote four coronation anthems; the best known one, taking text from
First Kings, is Zadok the Priest. Beethoven wrote twelve variations
for piano and cello on the chorus “See, the conqu'ring hero comes”
from this man's oratorio, Judas Maccabaeus. This composer also
composed a piece for George I to be performed on the River Thames.
For 10 points, name this composer of the Water Music who also included
the hallelujah chorus in his Messiah. {Hadrian} [Accept Publius Aelius
{Hadrianus} or Publius Aelius Traianus {Hadrianus} Augustus] The
executions of four senators, including the former governor of Judea,
marred the beginning of this man’s reign. This ruler’s refounding of a
city as Aelia Capitolina provoked a revolt led by Simon Bar Kokba.
This man dismissed Suetonius from his position as Imperial Biographer.
Among his building works are his villa at Tibur, and the rebuilding of
the Pantheon. This Emperor’s travels took him to all corners of the
Roman Empire, leading to his absence from Rome for four years, and
then five more years later in his reign.  For ten points, name the
successor to Trajan, known for his travels and buildings, including
his namesake wall in Britain. {Standard} Model One issue with this
framework revolves around that a certain two forces are approximately
30 orders of magnitude apart and is a hierarchy problem.  In 2001,
SNOLAB obtained evidence that the Sun was emitting a sufficient number
of three types of particle to confirm the predictions of this
framework.  The issue of CP-symmetry violation is another source of
problems in this framework, which string theory attempts to unify with
gravity and general relativity.  Validation of this model could be
helped by the confirmation of a certain object in addition to the
already verifed bottom and top quarks and tau neutrino.  The
confirmation of the Higgs Boson’s existence would complete the set of
particles predicted by, for 10 points, what widely agreed-upon model
in particle physics? {Occupy Wall Street} [Prompt on “Occupy”] A
poster of a ballerina atop a bull served to promote the first meeting
of this movement. One Chase Plaza was the original destination of
protestors part of this movement, who instead diverted to a park owned
by Brookfield Office Properties. Adbusters, creators of the
aforementioned poster, called for 20,000 people to camp at this
movement’s namesake location. Police started clearing supporters of
this movement from Zucotti Park on November 15th, 2011, after nearly
two months camping there. This movement’s most famous slogan is “We
are the 99%”, and this protest spawned spinoffs around the world. For
ten points, name this movement seeking to encamp in the financial
district of New York City. Takehaya {Susano'o}-no-Mikoto [or
{Susanoo}; or {Susano-wo}; prompt on “His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-
Augustness”] In one story, this deity gave his future son-in-law three
tests: to sleep in a room full of snakes, then in a room of wasps and
then to bring back an arrow from a burning field. That son-in-law
later obtained this deity’s marriage blessing after he tied this
deity's hair to a roof.  In another story, this deity requested eight
barrels of wine to intoxicate and slay an eight-headed dragon, from
whose corpse this deity found a sword known as The Grasscutter. In yet
another story, this deity destroyed his sister's rice fields and threw
a flayed horse into her weaving room, causing her to hide in a cave
and plunge the heavens and earth into darkness. For 10 points, name
this Shinto deity born from Izanagi's nose, the god of storms and
winds and brother of Amaterasu. {Northwest} Rebellion [or the {Second
Riel} Rebellion] Fort Carlton was abandoned by government forces
following their defeat at Duck Lake in this event that also
established the exovedate.  General Frederick Middleton’s march on the
seat of the aggressors during this event was delayed by his defeat at
Fish Creek.  That defeat during this event occurred at the hands of
Gabriel Dumont, who persuaded one of this event’s leaders to return
from exile in the United States. The government victory at Batoche
dispersed the Saskatchewan Provisional Government during this event.
For ten points, name this 1885 rebellion in which Louis Riel led the
Saskatchewan Metis against the Canadian government. {Salome} with the
{head of John The Baptist} Botticelli surrounded the central character
in this scene with a dark, barred window and bright red castle wall.
In another version of this scene, a man on the right holds a sheathed
sword with one hand and the central object with the other while the
black-and-white-clad central character looks away on the left.
Titian's treatment of this scene includes a young woman looking up at
a character in a red dress who holds a plate containing the central
object. Cranach the Elder painted the central character and object of
this scene at the bottom centre of his Feast of Herod.  For 10 points,
name this scene in which a daughter of Herodias carries a silver
platter with a severed body part belonging to a certain biblical
preacher. {Aristophanes} In one of this playwright's works, a man wins
control of the senate after informing them that he can acquire cheap
anchovies and earlier wins a contest where he claims he can make his
opponent run in fear by shouting.  In another of this playwright's
works, a request to sacrifice a white stallion is refused before a jug
of Thasian wine is used to swear the play's central action.  That play
by this man also includes a scene where a character quickly sets up a
bed to tease Kinesias after he agrees to the title character's
demands.  This man also wrote a play where Pisthetaerus creates a city
in the sky and another in which the title creatures emit the sound
"Brekekekex koax koax."  For 10 points, name this ancient Greek author
of Lysistrata, The Birds and The Frogs. The {Heights of Macchu Picchu}
One symbol in this poem is a "furious condor" that is compared to "a
horseshoe of red-cased wings" who at one point casts a "ravening
shadow" "across the Sundial like a black ship."  This poem's narrator
is first described as going "from the air to the air, like an empty
net" but repeats "Rise to be born with me, brother" after making this
poem's central journey. The narrator of this poem proclaims "climb up
with me, American love" after reaching the title location, where he
addresses the "Wilkamayu of resonant threads" speaking a language
"barely uprooted from your Andean form." Appearing after “A Lamp On
Earth” in a larger work, name for 10 points this second poem in Pablo
Neruda's Canto General in which he ascends the ruins of an ancient
Incan city. Thomas {Hobbes} In one work, this philosopher argued that
words name things but the utterance of a word is what carries
signification. In that same work, this philosopher also argued that
mutual fear and not mutual love between men informs their decision to
enter society.  That work by this philosopher is De Cive and forms a
trilogy with his De Corpore and De Homine.  This philosopher argued
that absolute monarchy is the only form of government that can
guarantee peace in his best known work, where he postulates that life
without government would be “bellum omnium contra omnes”, or a “war of
all against all.” For ten points, name this political philosopher who
wrote on the social contract in Leviathan. Ruth {Benedict} In one
work, this social scientist writes that the central concept, “like an
individual, is a more or less consistent pattern of thought and
action.” In that same work by this person, she elaborates upon a
theory of “personality-writ-large” by analyzing sketches of the Zuni,
Dobu and Kwakiutl native tribes.  In another work, this anthropologist
analyzes social structures based on internal conscience and compares
it to one that emphasizes how one’s conduct appears to others.  For
the latter, this anthropologist discusses how the giri honor code and
actions like ritual suicide, or seppuku, exemplify the “shame culture”
of Japan.  For 10 points, name this American anthropologist, the
author of Patterns of Culture and The Chrysanthemum and the Sword.
{Stem cell}s The inducible variety of these cells is produced via
transfection of genes such as Oct-3/4, Sox2, and c-Myc into specific
somatic cells, such as fibroblasts. Their existence was demonstrated
by McCulloch and Till in 1963, with experiments involving bone marrow
cells injected into irradiated mice. The neural variety of these is
responsible during development for producing neurons, astrocytes, and
oligodendrocytes, and is identified by a neurosphere assay. Therapies
using this class of cells are the focus of regenerative medicine. For
ten points, give this type of cell, identified by its ability for
self-renewal and differentiation, varieties of which include
embryonic, hematopoietic, and pluripotent. {Tyr} also accept {Tiwaz}
or {Ziu} In one myth, this god stole a brewing kettle for a feast with
Aegir but is unable to lift it. In Midgard, he governs at the Thing
while during Ragnorak he is destined to fight Garm, the watchdog of
the underworld, in a fight that would result in both their deaths. His
most famous story tells of how he enabled Gleipnir to bind Fenrir by
sticking his hand in the wolf’s mouth. For 10 points, Tuesday is
derived from which one-handed Norse god of war? {Highwaymen} (prompt
on bushrangers before mentioned) Shakespeare’s character Falstaff in
Henry IV, Part 1 is one of these. This profession was first used in
The Counter’s Commonwealth while notable ones include James MacLaine
and Claude Du Vall, both of whom were executed. Australian versions
were these were known as Bushrangers. Alfred Noyes wrote a poem about
these men where the character dies on the highway in an attempt to
revenge the death of his lover. The phrase “Stand and Deliver!”
describes, for ten points, this criminal profession that travels by
horse on the highway. {Quotations from Chairman Mao }(accept The
Little Red Book) “We must have faith in the masses and we must have
faith in the Party,” declared this book. The second edition was
revised to include the line: “Workers of the World, Unite!” and was
only issue to senior officers. With the exception of books by Lenin
and Engels, this was the only other book authorized for distribution
in China during the height of the Cultural Revolution. For 10 points,
name this small-book that contains the thoughts of Mao. {Alberta}
Canada’s only Mormon temple is found in this place, while the 49th
parallel separates it from Montana in the south. Farming, ranching and
oil mining are major industries in this province. It played host to
the XV (15th) Winter Olympic Games in 1988 which saw no gold medals
won by Canada. For 10 points, name this province, home of Wayne
Gretzky’s first NHL team and location of “The Greatest Outdoor Show on
Earth.” {Yttrium }(prompt on Y) This element was discovered in 1828 by
Friedrich Wöhler. It is one of four elements named after the village
of Ytterby in Sweden. Its physical characteristic is a silvery white
and highly crystalline. Classified as a “rare earth element” this
element is used in making as phosphors in LEDs and CRTs and is used in
superconductors. For 10 points, name this element, whose atomic symbol
is Y. {Louis XVI} This man tried to speak to his people before he was
beheaded, but was drummed out. Despite being unable to initially
consummate his marriage to an Austrian archduchess, he later had it
remedied with an operation. Convicted of treason, he was condemned to
death by the National Convention during the French Revolution. For 10
points, name this decapitated king of France and husband of Marie-
Antoinette. {Horse and Train} The setting of this painting is the
outskirts of Sackville, New Brunswick, where the artist spent most of
his youth. It was inspired by the poem, Dedicated to Mary Campbell,
and utilises asymmetry extremely well. Dofasco donated this painting
to the Art Gallery of Hamilton in 1957 and it also appears on the
cover of the album Night Vision by Bruce Cockburn. For 10 points, name
this Alexander Colville painting which features a foreground horse
galloping along the tracks towards an oncoming train. {T}homas D’Arcy
{McGee} Because of his involvement in the Young Irelander Rebellion of
1848, he was forced to flee to Canada to avoid his arrest warrant. As
minister of immigration, agriculture and statistics in the new
Conservative government of 1863, this man was a Canadian delegate to
the Charlottetown and Quebec Conferences. Uncle of Frank McGee, For 10
points, name this Irish Nationalist, Father of Confederation, who
remains the only Canadian Member of Parliament to have been
assassinated. {Piezoelectricity} First demonstrated in 1880 by Pierre
and Jacques Curie this property is observed in many materials
including Berlinite, Sucrose, and Sodium Potassium Tartrate. One of
the first major uses of this property was in the development of the
ultrasonic transducers used in sonar systems. Quartz is the most
common material that exhibits this property, and is often used as such
to generate a clock signal. Most often used in lighters to create
electricity to ignite the gas, for 10 points, name this property of
some materials which creates electricity when a force is applied to
it. {Who Has Seen the Wind} In one scene of this novel, Young Ben
mercifully kills the gophers to end their suffering while in another,
Jappy the dog is killed by a dray. Schoolmaster Digby, Saint Sammy,
and Mrs. Thompson are members of the small Depression-era Saskatchewan
town, in which this novel takes place. The title is taken from a poem
by Christina Rossetti that ends with the lines “but when the trees bow
down their heads / the wind in passing by.” For 10 points, name this
novel about the coming-of-age of Brian O'Connal, by W. O. Mitchell.
{Atlanta} After capturing this city, General Sherman famously uttered
the phrase, “War is hell.” Its airport has the greatest amount of
traffic internationally last year. That airport is Hartsfield-Jackson
named after two former mayors of this city. After a fierce bidding, it
beat out Athens, Melbourne, and Toronto to host the XXVI (26th)
Olympic Games, although it was marred by the Centennial Park Bombing
and being overly commercialized. Currently the home of the Falcons,
the Hawks, and the Braves, for 10 points, name this capital city of
Georgia. {Seven} or {7} The international calling code of Russia. The
number of Lucky Gods in Japanese Mythology. Mickey Mantle of the NY
Yankees wore this number. Shakespeare proposed a theory of the Ages of
Man which contained this number. A Quidditch has this many players.
The number of hills in classical Rome. For 10 points, name the number
of days in the Christian Creationist story. {Silent Spring} A letter
by Olga Huckins that describes the death of birds prompted this book
to be written. Because of its message, it was viewed as hostile by
certain industries, who claimed that its accusations were false.
However, President Kennedy heeded this book’s advice and strengthened
the regulations of chemical pesticides, in particular, the excessive
use of DDT on the environment. Opening with the line “A fable for
tomorrow” for 10 points, name this book by Rachel Carson that helped
launch the Green movement. {Acetone} (accept C3H6O before mentioned)
Most commonly manufactured from propylene and benzene in the cumene
process, this chemical is used in the manufacture of bisphenol A. When
oxidised, this chemical forms explosive peroxide. This chemical is a
very common polar solvent and often used as a denaturant for alcohol.
In the human body this chemical is created in small amounts by certain
metabolic processes. This chemical is often used in households as nail
polish remover and paint thinner. For 10 points, name this common
ketone with the formula C3H6O. René {Descartes} This man was the first
to correctly explain how rainbows worked, while he posited a mind-body
dualism in his Meditations on First Philosophy. In another of this
French philosopher’s works, he introduced a coordinate system and
tried to prove the existence of God. This work is the Discourse on
Method. FOR TEN POINTS, name this philosopher who lends his name to
the Cartesian plane and is best-known for the phrase, “cogito ergo
sum.” {Intolerance} This 1916 silent film was made in response to
criticism of the director's previous film. That film was Birth of a
Nation. Running for three-and-a-half hours, it was a commercial
failure. Regardless, it was selected for preservation by the United
States National Film Registry and ranked one of the best one hundred
movies by the American Film Institute. For ten points, which D.W.
Griffith epic is famous for its Babylon sequence? {Liberty Leading the
People} (accept {La Liberté guidant le people}) Two flags can be seen
in this work. The first is held by the central figure and the second
one is flying high over Notre Dame. In addition to being the
inspiration for the Statue of Liberty, this painting is regarded as a
final piece of the Age of Enlightenment. A man wearing a top-hat on
the left of the painting is thought to be a self-portrait as he
commemorates July Revolution. For 10 points, name this Eugène
Delacroix painting featuring a personification of Liberty standing
atop corpses. {Maslow’s hierarchy of needs} (accept {Theory of Human
Motivation}) Kurt Goldstein was the first to theorize this concept,
although it is not named for him. Clayton Alderfer's E-R-G model and
frustration-regression theory expanded on this theory. The author
introduced it in Toward a Psychology of Being, and at its base can be
found the physiological needs of sleep, food, breathing, water, and
sex. For 10 points, name this pyramidal construct that culminates in
self-actualization. {The Song of Roland }(accept {La Chanson de
Roland}) At the beginning of this work, the Frankish army is fighting
the Muslim King Marsilla, who is making his last stand at Saragossa.
The titular character dies a martyr after blowing his oliphant so hard
that his temples burst and saints carry his soul straight to Paradise.
Later in this work, Charlemagne arrives at the battlefield to defeat
the emir of Babylon, Baligant. For 10 points, name this epic poem
about of France. Star Wars: {Knights of the Old Republic} (accept
{KotOR}) This video game was released in 2004 by Bioware for both the
Xbox and the PC. Re-released in as part of the Star Wars: Best of PC
collection, it features unforgettable characters such as Bastille,
HK-47 and Darth Malak as they search for the Star Forge. A sequel to
this game is subtitled “The Sith Lord” and retains the Ebon Hawk as
the player’s main ship. For 10 points, name this Star Wars RPG game in
which the player must choose between the light and dark sides of the
Force. {2011 Egyptian Revolution} (prompt on year) Protests began with
anti-government slogans, after being inspired by similar events in
Tunisia and the death of Khaled Mohamed Saeed. The government
responded by shutting down communication services and sending in the
Central Security Force, both proving ineffective. Mohamed Morsi was
elected President, after this event resulted in the resignation of
Hosni Mubarak. For 10 points, name this event centralized in Tahrir
Square. the Andromeda Galaxy (accept M31 early) In a few billion
years, scientists expect this object to crash into the Milky Way,
possibly merging with it.  Recent observations by the Hubble telescope
suggest that this object might have a double nucleus. It is a type Sb
spiral galaxy that is believed to be about 3 million light years away.
Designated M31, this galaxy is a member of our local group. Often
visible to the naked eye is, FTP, this large spiral galaxy, the
nearest to our galaxy. the Compromise of 1820 (accept Missouri
Compromise) While the Dred Scott v. Sanford case did rule the first
one unconstitutional, it upheld the second one, which was interpreted
to say that no person of African or mulatto descent could be a citizen
of the U.S. The Thomas amendment attached to it prohibited slavery
north of 36°30’ with the exception of a certain area.  FTP, name this
agreement designed to keep the balance between free and slave states
that permitted its namesake state and Maine to enter the Union. Native
Son At the beginning of this work partly based on the life of Robert
Nixon, the main character attacks a member of his own gang while
robbing a store and becomes a chauffeur for the Daltons, a wealthy
white family. He then kills his boss’s daughter and his girlfriend and
is sentenced to death. FTP, identify the novel focused on the life of
Bigger Thomas by Richard Wright. messenger ribonucleic acid snRPS
mediate the processing of this type of organic chemical, which leaves
it with its characteristic looped structure. Capping, the addition of
a non-standard base, allows these macromolecules to permeate the
nuclear envelope by nuclear pores and also allows binding to ribosomal
subunits. Each molecule of this organic acid corresponds to a
monopeptide. Created from the template strand by primary
transcription, this nucleic acid directs translation. FTP, identify
this type of RNA. El Greco (or Doménikos Theotokópoulos) This person
produced Portrait of Giulio Clovio and Vincentio Anastagi and Christ
Healing the Blind in the style of Titian. This artist’s altarpiece for
Santo Domingo el Antiguo, Assumption of the Virgin, marked the
beginning of his mature style, while he is also notable for his Views
of his adopted home, Toledo. FTP, name this Byzantine-influenced
baroque artist best-known for The Burial of Count Orgaz; a Crete-born
painter whose nickname means “The Greek.” To Althea, from Prison While
the title figure “whispers at the grates”, the narrator lies “tangled
in her hair and fettered to her eye”. The narrator also sings “the
sweetness, mercy, and majesty and glories of his king” all while not
enjoying freedom. The narrator believes that “stone walls do not a
prison make, nor iron bars a cage” in, FTP, what poem by Richard
Lovelace? Niccolò Machiavelli At 29, he became head of the cancelleria
and convinced Piero Soderini that a militia would be preferable to
mercenaries. The best-known of his three plays is La Mandragola  or
The Mandrake. In his Discourses on the First Ten Books of Titus Livy,
he claims that Romulus was justified in killing his brother for the
common good. His name today is widely equated with doing whatever acts
are necessary to accomplish a goal, regardless of moral or ethical
concerns. FTP, name this Florentine whose most famous work on
political theory is The Prince. Jean-Jacques Rousseau Though this
person’s opera The Village Blacksmith was a moderate success, the
disapproval of J.P.  Rameau ceased his composition of music. This
writer’s The Reveries of the Solitary Walker are of  secondary
importance to another autobiography, and his sequel to a well-known
work, Julie, is little-read today. This thinker’s Discourse on
Inequality is discussed in his autobiographical Confessions. FTP, name
this author of The Social Contract and Émile; a Swiss-French
philosopher of the eighteenth century. electrons Along with an anti-
neutrino, it is a product of beta decay. A lepton with spin ½, this
particle is thought to be indivisible. The famous Double Slit
Experiment showed that this particle produced interference patterns
similar to light. Its antiparticle, the positron, was the first
antimatter particle to be detected. FTP, name this elementary particle
that was discovered in experiments conducted in 1897 by J. J. Thompson
and that can be found orbiting the nucleus. Tropicana Field The
groundbreaking for this Major League Baseball stadium was in 1986, a
full seven years before it attracted a professional team; however,
that first professional team didn’t play baseball – it was a
professional hockey team. It finally picked up an expansion MLB team
in 1998 and the next year it played host to the NCAA Men’s Basketball
Final Four. FTP, name this stadium, former home to the Tampa Bay
Lightning and current home to baseball’s Devil Rays. Brave New World
In this work, Benito Hoover asks Lenina to go to the North Pole with
him, but she refuses because she already went last summer with George
Edzel. Helmholtz Watson writes for The Hourly Radio but feels
unsatisfied with his work because he has no good subject matter.
Mustapha Mond keeps a library of  forbidden books in his study and
shows them to John and Bernard Marx. Soma keeps everyone happy,
because “a gramme is better than a damn.” FTP, name this Huxley work
about a futuristic dystopia. the Decembrist Uprising Its leaders were
comprised of military officers who had absorbed liberal Western ideas
during the Napoleonic wars, and wished to see similar reforms in their
Russian homeland. Though they advocated  representative democracy and
human rights, an overall lack of civilian support doomed the uprising.
They persuaded several regiments to demand Constantine be crowned, but
the rebels were poorly organized due to the confusion surrounding the
succession of Alexander I. FTP, what rebellion did Nicholas I crush in
1825? colligative properties In Raoult’s Law, which states that the
vapor pressure in a solution is proportional to the mole fraction of
the solvent, the vapor pressure is an example of this type of
property. Properties of this type usually depend on the molarity,
molality, or mole fraction of a substance present. Freezing point
depression and boiling point elevation are also examples of this.
Chemical properties that depend solely on the amount of solute and not
the composition of the solute are called, FTP, what? the Whiskey Ring
This conspiracy operated mainly in St. Louis, Milwaukee, and Chicago,
but extended to New Orleans, Peoria, and Cincinnati as well. It
involved bribing IRS officials in order to keep a tax on their
product. The president's secretary Orville E. Babcock was indicted and
the held money was to be used to fund the  campaign for the reelection
of Ulysses S. Grant. FTP, identify this Grant- Presidency scandal that
involved a fraud in taxes on the namesake alcoholic beverage. Crime
and Punishment (or Prestupleniye i nakazaniye) This work’s minor
characters Marmeladov and Svidrigailov are afflicted by visions due to
drunkenness and amoral acts, respectively. This book’s central act is
motivated in part by the main character’s  “Napoleonic” theory, which
exempts extraordinary people from conventional ethics and which is at
length refuted by Sonya Marmeladova. In this long novel, Porfiry
Petrovich investigates the murder of a  pawnbroker by Raskolnikov, who
eventually confesses and is sent to Siberia. FTP, name this work of
Fyodor Dostoyevsky. Medea This person dismembered Apsyrtos and threw
his pieces into the sea to slow the fleet of Colchis. By rejuvenating
an aged ram, this magician tricked the daughters of Iolcus into
boiling him in a pot; this she did to avenge her husband, whom Iolcus
had sent on a fatal errand. This enchantress may have been a  daughter
of Helios, as a flying chariot was sent for her when she was spurned
in favor of Glauce, whom she poisoned. FTP, name this vengeful Greek
sorceress who helped to obtain the Golden Fleece for her first
husband, Jason. lose 5 dollars (accept negative 5 dollars) Pencil and
Paper Ready. Scott is playing dice in a back alley. If he wins, he
gains four dollars; otherwise, he loses two dollars. Each game has a
one-fourth probability that Scott will win and he loses otherwise. If
Scott plays ten games, how much money will he gain or lose on average?
Note that, since each game is an independent event, we can simply
calculate the expected value for one game and multiply it by ten and
that expected value is simply the probability times the payout summed
over all possible payouts; thus each game has an expected loss of 25
cents. FTP, state Scott's expected value for playing ten games?
Dresden The capital of the German state of Saxony, this city was once
famed for its baroque architecture.  Known as “Florence on the Elbe”
or the “Florence of the North,” this city of nearly half a million
people has a reputation as Germany’s “Silicon Valley.” This city may
be best known for a bombing raid that  occurred on February 14, 1945;
the horrific destruction thereof was witnessed by a 22-year-old
American writer, who would later draw upon it for his most famous
work. FTP, identify this city immortalized by Kurt Vonnegut in
Slaughterhouse Five. Harrison Bergeron In this work, the year 2081
sees passage of the 211th, 212th, and 213th amendments, and they are
enforced by the State Handicapper General, Diana Moon Glampers. After
the title character declares  himself Emperor, Glampers walks in with
a double-barrel 10-gauge shotgun and shoots him and his  Empress while
they’re kissing near the ceiling. FTP, in what work by Kurt Vonnegut
is everyone finally equal? gong (accept tam-tam before it’s mentioned
and prompt on it afterwards) An off-stage one of these features
prominently in Villa-Lobos’ [VEE-yah YO-bowsh-uz] seventh  Chôros.
First appearing in written music in a funeral march from Gossec’s
Mirabeau, this is a common element in gamelan [GAM-uh-lawn] and is
also known as a tam-tam. Though an anvil is called for, many
performances of Mahler’s “Tragic” symphony utilize this percussion
instrument to symbolize the blows of fate. FTP, name this large
percussion instrument, usually a metallic disc about a meter in
diameter, that is hung from a support and played by striking with a
hammer. Holden Caulfield (accept either name) This person stays at the
Edmont Hotel and hears Buddy Singer play in the Lavender Room. He
wanted to go to Massachusetts or Vermont to live in a cabin with Sally
until their money ran out, but she refused. Mr.  Spencer yells at him
for not knowing anything about the Egyptians in history class. His
favorite short story is The Secret Goldfish by his brother D.B. He
likes talking to his sister Phoebe because she isn’t a phony.  FTP,
name this protagonist of The Catcher in the Rye. negative one half
Pencil and Paper Ready. Let A be the 2 by 2 matrix with top row one
three, bottom row two four. Let B  be the inverse of A. What is the
determinant of B? This can be done simply by recalling that the
determinant of an inverse is equal to the reciprocal of the
determinant. FTP what is the reciprocal of one times four minus three
times two? The Hypochondriac (or The Imaginary Invalid or Le Malade
imaginaire) In this work, the part of Thyrsis is sung by Cleantes as
he pretends to be a music teacher. Monsieur Bonnefoy suggests for a
will to be altered in favor of Belina after her husband’s death.
Thomas Dyafoirus believes in the ancients but not the circulation of
blood. Toinette pretends to be a doctor, claims to be more than eighty
years old, and advises that an arm and an eye should be removed from
Argan. FTP, name this French play about a man who thinks he is
constantly ill. Violin Concerti, for violin, strings & continuo (The
Four Seasons; "Il cimento”), Op. 8 (or Le quattro stagioni; accept any
underlined part) Comprising the beginning third of The Contest of
Harmony and Invention, this work was famously first recorded in the
modern era by Bernardino Molinari and the Academy of Sta. Cicilia
[SAN-tuh chee-CHEEL-yuh]. Exemplary of the grosso form in each of its
components, this musical work was originally published with series of
sonnets, one of which was meant to read before each movement was
played, making it among the earliest overtly programmatic pieces. FTP,
name this work consisting of “La Primavera”, “L'estate” [LESS-tay],
“L'autunno” [law-TWO-no], and “L'inverno” [lin-VER-no]; a sequence of
four concerti for violin by Antonio Vivaldi. Anubis This deity
resurrected his uncle or father after his aunt collected all but one
of the pieces of her husband’s dismembered body. He then invented the
process of mummification, placing the first mummy, Osiris, in charge
of the underworld. FTP, name this Egyptian god who had the head of a
jackal and was the son of Nephthys and either Osiris or Set. the Pink
Floyd Sound This group’s founder only recently died, though he had
been unable to work for several decades. That founder appears only
“Corporal Klegg” and on the band’s first album, The Piper at the Gates
of Dawn, which is rather different cry from such fare is Atom, Heart,
Mother and The Division Bell, which were created without Syd Barrett.
However, this band is best known for a string of multiple-platinum
concepts album in the 70’s, ending with The Final Cut. FTP, name this
paradigm of progressive rock responsible for Animals, Wish You Were
Here, The Wall, and Dark Side of the Moon. Ferdinand Marcos After the
end of WWII, this person claimed to have led the Maharlikas, a
guerrilla unit, against invading Japanese, but this claim later proved
bogus. When he ran for President in 1965, the Liberal Party refused to
back him, so he ran for the Nationalista Party and won. In 1972, he
declared martial law and the next year, he had himself made president
for life. His primary opponent, Benigno Aquino, was assassinated on
returning from the U.S., but Benigno's widow Corazon would be sworn in
after this man left office. FTP, name this infamous Philippine
dictator. Saint Peter’s Basilica Maderno’s plan to add a series of
campaniles to this structure was a notorious failure, though the
executor of that plan did design its famous bronze Baldachino. The
plan for this structure was adapted from Bramante’s Greek cross to a
Latin Cross by Giuliano da Sangallo. FTP, name this massive church
that contains a statue of St. Longinus, the tomb of Urban VIII, and
Michelangelo’s Pietà; the current church of the Pope. hymenoptera This
order is characterized by facultative sex determination, as the
reproducing members utilize a reservoir known as a spermatheca to
determine the gender of offspring. As noted by Lorenz, some members
communicate through dances, and most species are characterized by a
very high degree of sexual dimorphism, so that males are usually
called drones and females queens. FTP name this order with a name
meaning “membrane-winged” which includes chalcids, wasps, bees, and
ants. Sikhism In this religion’s code of discipline, the Rehat
Maryada, followers should wake up between 3 and 6 in the morning to
meditate. Followers must remove their shoes and cover their hair when
entering this religion’s place of worship, and are to learn Punjabi to
fully understand the scriptures. Key elements of this religion are
social equality through refusal of the caste system and support of the
community. FTP, name this religion founded in the fifteenth century by
Guru Nanak; a major religion of India along with Hinduism, Islam, and
Jainism. latent heat (or latent enthalpy; prompt on things like “heat
of fusion”, “heat of melting”, “heat of evaporation”, etc.) According
to the Clausius-Clapeyron equation, this property is the numerator in
the pressure derivative at a coexistence curve. Defined by Joseph
Black in about 1750, this energetic may be divided by a sensible heat
transfer to yield the inverse of Bowen’s ratio. Fundamentally, this
quantity exists because there is some potential energy change to
changing the phase of a material, even at constant conditions. FTP,
identify this quantity from thermal chemistry; the amount of energy
required to cause a material to change phase. Rene {Descartes}
Positing the pineal gland as the resolving his namesake dualism
problem, this person derived the result known as Snell’s law
independent of Snell. Known for the Meditations on First Philosophy
that he produced in 1641, this thinker’s four-part major work, Essais
philosophiques, was published in 1637 and included the notable
Discourse on Method. FTP, name this French mathematician and
philosopher who coined the saying “Cogito Ergo Sum,” “I think,
therefore I am.” Henry James This person’s attempts to write for the
stage ended with the failure of Guy Domville. Milly Theale’s illness
turns the plot of this author’s The Wings of the Dove, which joins The
Golden Bowl among his later novels. Lambert Strether is sent to Paris
after Chad Newsome in this writer’s The Ambassadors, while a love
story set against the women’s suffrage movement is told in The
Bostonians. FTP, name this Anglo-American author best known for Daisy
Miller, The Turn of the Screw, and The Portrait of a Lady. 16\. This
city of 30,000 residents is the largest in it the country in that it
serves as one of the four quartiers; that country has no official
capital. It boasts a major Formula One Grand Prix, and a major tennis
tournament that was This person’s attempts to write for the stage
ended with the failure of Guy Domville. Milly Theale’s illness turns
the plot of this author’s The Wings of the Dove, which joins The
Golden Bowl among his later novels. Lambert Strether is sent to Paris
after Chad Newsome in this writer’s The Ambassadors, while a love
story set against the women’s suffrage movement is told in The
Bostonians. FTP, name this Anglo-American author best known for Daisy
Miller, The Turn of the Screw, and The Portrait of a Lady. Pendleton
Civil Service Reform Act The bill was sponsored by Dorman Eaton and he
was made the first head of the commission created by it. When first
passed, it only protected ten percent of federal workers, but now it
protects ninety percent from such practices as being fired due to
political affiliation. It also prevented political parties from
demanding a percentage of federal workers’ salaries. FTP, name this
1883 act that started to put an end to the spoils system. Hooke’s law
The general version of this physical lemma is relation between the
stress and strain with a tensor of proportionality known as Young’s
modulus. Harmonic oscillators obey this law to a linear approximation,
so it is useful in quantum mechanics, and it does not apply above a
point known as the elastic limit because it models reversible, elastic
displacements. FTP, name this physical law that is usually given as
simply F  equals minus k delta x, or the restoring force is
proportional to the distance of displacement. David Ben-Gurion (or
David Gruen) As a teenager he led “Ezra”, a Zionist youth group, and,
after arriving in Israel, he established the self-defense group
“Hashomer.” In the 1920's, he dominated the Histadrut and in 1935 was
elected chairman of the World Zionist Organization. He presided over
various projects including “Operation Magic Carpet,”  which was aimed
at developing the newly created nation of Israel. FTP, name this first
Israeli Prime Minister. Thoth Called the “self-created, to whom none
had given birth,” the “lord of divine words,” and the “heart of  Ra,”
this patron of the arts, hieroglyphics, science, and wisdom was
believed to be the author of the Book  of the Dead. When Horus and Set
fought, he was the judge, and one of his most important duties was to
write down the results of the weighing of the heart of a deceased
entering the afterlife. FTP, name this ibis-  headed Egyptian god
often associated with writing. Roy Hobbs As a teenager, this person
was shot by Harriet Bird but survived. He was first discovered by Sam
Simpson, but Sam died on the way to this man’s first tryout. Red Blow
does his best to steer him out of  trouble, but both Judge Banner and
Gus Sands attempt to bribe him to throw the final game that would give
the Knights the pennant. FTP, name this famous fictional baseball
player, the main character in Bernard  Malamud’s The Natural. Immanuel
Kant J.G. Fichte’s early works so resembled this person’s in style
that they were misattributed for a time. A  student of Christian
Wolff, this thinker posited the nebular hypothesis in Universal
Natural History and  Theories of the Heavens and tried his hand at
international politics in Project for a Perpetual Peace, an
application of his best-known moral idea, which was first posited in
Foundations of the Metaphysics of  Morals. FTP, name this philosopher
who expounded on his categorical imperative in the Critique of
Practical Reason, which he wrote as a professor in Königsberg,
Germany. O Captain, My Captain At the end of each of the three stanzas
of this poem, the narrator states that the title figure is “fallen
cold and dead”. This is established further in the last stanza, as he
does not answer, nor does he feel the  narrator’s arm. The trip is
over, and the prize was won, but at the end, the narrator walks the
deck  mournfully. FTP, name this poem, one of several poems dedicated
to Abraham Lincoln by Walt Whitman. Crispus Attucks When this person’s
master sent him to Boston, he applied for a job as a whaler and didn’t
come back to  Boston for another 20 years. When he came back, a
British soldier shot a boy while being taunted, after  which this man
was inspired to make a speech about striking back against the British.
On March 5, 1770,  he sounded the fire alarms, calling them to solve
the British problem, and in the ensuing shooting, Samuel  Gray, James
Caldwell and three others were killed. FTP, identify this black man,
the first killed during  what would be called the Boston Massacre.
Kenneth Wayne Jennings III His young son Dylan began calling him by
his first and last name after seeing him on TV for so long; his
appearances that included spots for AT&T and Allstate. He grew up
mostly in South Korea and Singapore  and later did two years of
missionary work in Spain. This resident of Murray, Utah has a new book
called  Brainiac: Adventures in the Curious, Competitive, Compulsive
World of Trivia Buffs, but, FTP, who is  better known for his historic
run on the television game show Jeopardy! Alexander the Great (or
Alexander III) Upon hearing a false rumor that he was dead, Thebes
revolted, and he rushed south and sacked the city  except for Pindar’s
home and the temples. When the son of Parmenion was implicated in a
conspiracy  against him, he killed both Parmenion and his son,
alienating his soldiers. The Egyptians saw him as the  son of Amon-Ra
and, after sacking, Persepolis he became the ruler of the Persian
empire. FTP, name this  son of Philip II of Macedon, a man whose
conquests went as far east as northern India. Montana This state’s
highest point, Granite Peak, features a plateau called “Froze-to-
Death.” The four designs  voted on for its 2007 state quarter included
a bull elk, a bison skull, and two featuring the words “Big Sky
Country.” Because its population is still under one million, its
Senators Conrad Burns and Max Baucus  represent two-thirds of its
Congressional delegation. FTP, name the state adjacent to more
Canadian  provinces than any other. Johann Sebastian Bach (accept
Johann Sebastian Bach; prompt on “Bach” or “J. Bach” or  “Johann
Bach”) Schmieder assembled the authoritative catalogue of this
person’s work, the BWV. Re-discovered by  Mendelsshon in 1829, this
artist’s English Suites inaugurated the genre of keyboard partitas,
while his  Cantatas and Orgel-Büchlein are among the most frequently
performed works of sacred music. This  composer’s immortal works
include a Mass in B minor, the St. Matthew Passion, a Tocatta and
Fugue in D  minor, and the Brandenburg Concertos. FTP, name this
notable admirer of Buxtehude [BOOKS-tuh-you-  duh] and Kantor of the
Leipzig Tomaskirche [TOM-us-ker-kuh], the most notable composer of the
German  Baroque. capacitance Though it isn’t length, in the cgs system
of units, this quantity is measured in centimeters; this makes  sense
because it can be viewed as a purely geometric property of an object.
For two parallel conducting  plates, this quantity is proportional to
the area of the plates and inversely proportional to the plate
separation. FTP identify this electrical quantity defined as the ratio
of charge to voltage on a body and that, in the SI system, is measured
in Farads. Peter Paul Rubens This person depicted a subject close to
his heart in The Little Fur and Venus and Adonis, namely, his  third
wife Helena Fourment, who also appears on the left in his Garden of
Love. His second career as an  ambassador lead to the Allegory of
Peace and War, which may have motivated Charles I to choose him to
decorate the ceiling of the royal Banqueting Hall at Whitehall Palace.
FTP, name this painter known for his  decoration of the Luxembourg
Palace with scenes from the life of Marie de’ Medici; a German-born
Belgian painter known for the plumpness of his female nudes. the
Qur’an Nöldeke’s 1860 History of this book was highly influential for
a number of years. The title of Hafez is  reserved for someone capable
of reciting its entirety; this work is split into thirty ajza’ for
purposes of  recitation, but it is more conventionally divided into
one hundred sixteen chapters, known as surahs. FTP,  name this self-
described “well-preserved tablet” that is held to be co-perfect and
co-equal with Allah as the  chief holy book of Islam. portmanteau
words James Joyce utilized these kinds of words in Finnegan’s Wake,
though they were created hundreds of  years earlier when Humpty Dumpty
explained what they were using the word slithy. Coming from the
French for “coat rack,” historical examples include Gestapo and
Californication. FTP, Lewis Carroll  created what kind of word that is
a combination of two words “packed up” into one? mitochondrion (or
mitochondria) This body’s inner membrane increases its surface area-
to-volume ratio by many folds known as cristae.  This membrane-
enclosed system’s genetic properties lead to the endosymbiotic
hypothesis, the idea that it  originated as a captured prokaryote.
This organelle has its own DNA which, in humans, is inherited only
from the mother. ATPase proteins permeate this cellular organelle’s
membranes since its function is to  create ATP. FTP, identify this
organelle, the “powerhouse” of the cell. House Un-American Activities
Committee Martin Dies was the first chairman of this and Richard Nixon
was a member of it. In 1969 it was  renamed the Internal Security
Committee, though it was abolished six years later. In 1947, it
charged Alvah  Bessie, Herbert Biberman and eight others in the
entertainment industry with contempt and sent the  Hollywood Ten to
prison. FTP, name this Congressional committee which was used by
Joseph McCarthy  to rise to power. Bloody Sunday Events culminating in
the event with this nickname started with the dismissal from a factory
of four  workers from who happened to be members of a union headed by
Father George Gapon. Over the next few  days, over 100,000 workers
went on strike and Father Gapon wrote a petition which was signed by
over  150,000 people. A large procession followed him when he tried to
present it to the czar and, upon arriving  at the palace, they were
fired upon. FTP, give the sanguine nickname for the events of January
22, 1905 in  St. Petersburg, Russia. The Dunciad In the first edition,
Lewis Theobald is given the leading role, but in the final edition,
Colley Cibber is named emperor. In the third book, Cibber falls
asleep, and sees the past, present, and future, where  Dullness rules
over all. In the fourth book, Dullness’ reign extends to scholarship,
art, and science.  Alexander Pope attacks his critics in, FTP, what
work, the “dunce-epic?” Frederick II or Frederick the Great (prompt on
“Frederick”) As a youth he tried to flee his father’s territory with
Lieutenant von Katte, but they were caught. He lost  his title of
crown prince and Katte was executed in front of him. A gifted child,
he preferred culture to  politics, and even wrote a flute concerto
that is still performed today. This Hohenzollern collaborated with
Voltaire in the anonymously published Antimachiavell [ante-MACH-ee-uh-
vell], an idealistic picture of a  ruler in opposition to the views of
Machiavelli. After winning at the battles of Mollwitz and Chotusitz,
he  secured his country’s control of Silesia. One of the enlightened
despots, FTP, identify this Prussian ruler. Siva (or Siwa or Shiva)
This being is sometimes depicted as Nataraja, the Cosmic Dancer.
Sometimes joined with his mate as  Ardhanarisvara, this deity is
worshiped for fertility in the form of the linga. This lord of Kailasa
is the  father of Skanda and Ganesa with his consort, who is variously
known as Uma, Sati, Parvati, Durga, Kali,  or Sakti. FTP, name this
god who comprises the Trimurti with Brahma and Vishnu as the redeemer-
and  destroyer-god of Hinduism. Jerome David Salinger This person’s
early story “For Esmé – With Love and Squalor” relates the experiences
of a U.S.  serviceman in England and was probably drawn from personal
experience. This author wrote frequently of  a certain family,
including in Raise High the Roof Beam, Carpenters; Nine Stories; and
Seymour: An  Introduction. Seymour’s suicide is detailed in “A Perfect
Day for Bananafish,” while Franny and Zooey  deals with younger
members of the Glass family. FTP, name this author who is perhaps most
famous for  his tale of the flight from Pencey Prep of Holden
Caulfield, The Catcher in the Rye. Peer Gynt, incidental music, Op. 23
(accept either underlined part) Some lesser sections of this work find
the title character “at the Statue of Memnon,” “hunted by the
trolls,” and “by the Hut.” Created during a lull in a collaborative
partnership with Bjornson, this musical  work was later re-cast into a
ballet by Forrest and Wright. Many of this work’s non-vocal sections
were  cribbed by the composer to make two suites: among these are “The
Death of Åse;” “Solveig’s Song;”  “Anitra’s Dance;” and, of course,
“In the Hall of the Mountain King.” For ten points, identify this
suite of  incidental music for a play by Henrik Ibsen, the most
notable work of Edvard Grieg. Thomas Hobbes This man’s lesser-known
works include The Elements of Law and Body, Mind, and Citizen. His
philosophy was marked by a secular justification for the state, as he
was an ardent materialist. He believed  that men were in a constant
battle against everything, and that the only way to restore peace and
order was  to create a government, a sort of authoritarian social
contract. FTP, name this British philosopher and  political theorist,
a contemporary of Descartes, and the author of Leviathan. Hannibal
Barca One year later this man captured Salamanca and successfully
besieged Saguntum. In 229 BCE, his son-  in-law Hasdrubal the Fair
replaced Hamilcar as commander of forces in Iberia, though he would
assume  control himself after Hasdrubal’s murder. On his most famous
journey, he won battles at Ticinus and  Trebia, and his forces killed
Flaminius at Trasimene Lake, but he was crushed at the battle of
Cannae. FTP,  name this famous Carthaginian general who crossed the
Alps. The Necklace (or La Parure) In this work, the cloth at Matilda’s
table has not been changed for three days, and she hates eating in
her shabby apartment and thinks of luxurious surroundings and
priceless ornaments decorating graceful  furniture instead. She envies
Jeanne, a very wealthy friend with whom she went to school. Matilda’s
life  changes after the Commissioner Ball, for which she borrows the
title object, for her loss of which she and  her husband pay dearly
for ten years. For ten points, name this story about a forged piece of
jewelry in a  story by Guy de Maupassant. Elizabeth Barrett Browning
(accept Elizabeth Barrett; prompt on “Browning”) Two of this person’s
works, “A Desire” and “A Recognition,” are addressed “To George Sand.”
This  writer’s “The Best Thing in the World” claims that the title
entity is “Something out of it, I think.” Matthew  Arnold claimed that
this poet’s Aurora Leigh was the best poem in English, though her
early collection  Sonnets from the Portuguese is probably better-known
today. FTP, name this most notable Victorian  woman poet and wife of
another notable poet, Robert Browning. acids Iron (III) chloride can
function as one of these even though it lacks a common ion because it
is an  electron-pair acceptor, which fits Lewis definition of them.
The archaic Arrhenius definition of these is  insufficient because it
requires the compound in question be water-soluble. The Bronsted-Lowry
definition  holds that these compounds are hydrogen ion donors. FTP,
identify this type of chemical compound  members of which are
generally corrosive to metals and react with bases to form water and
salts. 14\. Roles of this person include Bloat in “Finding Nemo,” Vice
President Murney in “The Pacifier,” and  Tony the auto mechanic on
“Seinfeld.” In 1984, he became the first winner in the stand-up comedy
Iron (III) chloride can function as one of these even though it lacks
a common ion because it is an  electron-pair acceptor, which fits
Lewis definition of them. The archaic Arrhenius definition of these is
insufficient because it requires the compound in question be water-
soluble. The Bronsted-Lowry definition  holds that these compounds are
hydrogen ion donors. FTP, identify this type of chemical compound
members of which are generally corrosive to metals and react with
bases to form water and salts. Titian (or Tiziano Vecellio or Tiziano
Vecelli) This person’s late mythological paintings for Phillip II are
now mostly housed in the Prado. A notable  student of Giorgione,
several of whose works he probably completed, this artist’s use of
color is  characteristic of Venetian art, though he was not born in
Venice. His Danae shows a woman reclining nude,  although in different
versions she is accompanied by a maid and a cupid. FTP, name this
Renaissance  Venetian who painted the Pesaro Madonna, The Assumption
of the Virgin, Sacred and Profane Love and  the Venus of Urbino. one
Pencil and Paper Ready. What is the area under the curve 1 over x
squared from x equals 1 to x equals  infinity? This can be done if you
first recall that the area under a curve can be computed as the
integral of  the curve’s equation between the endpoints. Further note
that the antiderivative of 1 over x squared happens  to be negative 1
over x. Placing in the limits of integration, the area is determined
to be 1 minus 1 over b,  where b approaches upper limit. FTP, what is
the limit of 1 minus 1 over b as b approaches infinity? Quetzalcoatl
Originally associated with soil fertility, this being became a god of
the morning and evening star before  his followers converted him to a
representation of death and destruction. Driven into exile from his
city of  Tula by the god Tezcatlipoca, his followers expected the
return of this fair- skinned, bearded deity, resulting  in the
people’s misconception of the 1519 appearance of conquistador Hernan
Cortez. FTP, name this  Toltec and Aztec god, also known as the Plumed
or Feathered Serpent. Murder in the Cathedral In the first scene of
this play, the main character rejects offers from four tempters, while
the title action takes place in the second and final scene. The
interlude is a Christmas Day sermon to an invisible  congregation and,
after the title action, the four knights sent to perform it try to
plead for forgiveness from the audience. FTP, identify this T.S. Eliot
play about the murder of Thomas a Becket. East of Eden In this novel,
Adam Trask falls in love with the novel’s female antagonist, Cathy
Ames. Cathy gives  birth to two sons, Caleb and Aron, and then ditches
her family. Caleb tells Aron the truth about what  happened to their
mother and brings about Aron’s death, for which Adam never forgives
Caleb. FTP,  identify this novel based on the story of Cain and Abel;
a work by John Steinbeck. rococo (prompt on “style Régence” or
“Regency style”) Architects of this style include Germain Boffrand and
especially Batlassar Neumann, while Clodion is its most notable
sculptor. Boucher’s Toilet of Venus and The Music Party, Gersaint’s
Signboard, and the now-lost Garden of Bacchus by Antoine Watteau are
typical works, though this style is probably best  exemplified by
Jean-Honoré Fragonard’s The Swing, which depicts a young man peeking
at a pink-clad  young woman in a shady garden. FTP, name this light,
decorative French style of the eighteenth century,  the name of which
roughly means “opulent pearl.” Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf? At the
beginning of this work, the two main characters are expecting guests
at 2 A.M, but one of the  guests unexpectedly teaches biology. The
hosts are a history professor and the college president’s daughter and
the guests, the professor and his wife, are used as pawns by the hosts
as the night goes on. Nick,  Honey, George, and Martha are the
characters in, FTP, what work by Edward Albee whose title contains
the author of Orlando? the Amritsar massacre This event was
precipitated when Saifuddin Kichloo and Satyapal were deported; when
people came to  protest, they were fired upon. Those who survived
became an angry mob, burning banks and murdering  several Englishmen
in Punjab. In response, General Dyer took 50 armed soldiers, blocked
off the only exit in the Jallianwallah Bagh, and opened fire, killing
400 and wounding over a thousand. FTP, name the  atrocity that took
place on April 13, 1919 in the namesake Indian city. sophism (or
sophistic philosophy or sophists) Philostratus wrote a Lives of the
members of this school. Plato claimed that their reasoning is
eristikos, directed towards victory rather than truth. Notable members
of this group of thinkers were Antiphon;  Prodicus; Thrasymachus;
Gorgias, who invented rhetoric; and Protagoras, who claimed that man
is the  measure of all things. FTP, name this school of philosophy
opposed by Socrates, which was characterized  by capricious reasoning,
quibbling, and accepting money in exchange for teaching. Odin (or
Wodan or Woden or Wotan) Lord of the Einherjar, this eldest son of Bor
has two pets, Geri and Freki, who sit at his feet when he occupies
Hlidskialf. Possessor of Draupnir and Gungnir, this deity hanged
himself from Yggdrasil to attain the knowledge of the dead and
sacrificed one of his eyes to the Well of Mimir. Destined to be
swallowed  by Fenrir at Vigrid, this war god nevertheless rides into
battle on his eight- legged horse, Sleipnir. FTP, name this sky father
and chief of the Norse gods for whom Wednesday is named. the Prague
Spring During this period, the public was influenced by Ludvik
Vaculik’s column “2000 Words,” which was  published in a weekly and
both dailies. Television songs, a precursor to music videos, were
introduced, and it was called “Socialism with a human face” by its
leader Alexander Dubcek; it was later crushed by  Warsaw Pact forces.
FTP, name this 1968 counter-revolution in Czechloslovakia. interphase
Cells beyond the Hayflick limit are generally either in the G0 [gee-
zero] version of this or tagged for programmed cell death. Containing
two checkpoints, this in animal cells generally lasts at least 12
hours and may entail the existence of centrioles, but in a random
orientation. This period is comprised of G1 [gee-one], G2 [gee-two],
and S sub-phases, during the latter of which DNA replication takes
place. FTP, name  this longest segment of the cell cycle, the phase in
between one mitosis and another. moment of inertia (or rotational
inertia; prompt on “I”) This quantity is actually a tensor, but when
the axis of rotation is known, the more common scalar  quantity can be
formed using the dot product. When multiplied by the angular
acceleration, it yields the net torque on an object. When ice skaters
pull in their arms, they are reducing this quantity in order to
increase their angular speed by the conservation of angular momentum.
For an ideal particle, it is equal to the mass times the square of its
distance from the axis of rotation. FTP identify this physical
quantity, a measure of the difficulty in rotating an object; the
rotational analogue of mass. Menes (or Mena or Meni or Min or Narmer;
accept Aha or Scorpion King before they’re mentioned) Among this
person’s accomplishments are founding the cities of Crocodopolis and
Memphis, his  capital. In Crocodopolis, he ordered the building of the
first temple to Ptah. Also known as Aha and  Scorpion, he had two
wives, but only one heir, Djer. He routinely attacked the Nubians in
the south, and  expanded Egypt’s influence to the First Cataract. FTP,
name this pharaoh who united Upper and Lower  Egypt. Ludwig von
Beethoven Author of the “Heiligenstadt Testament,” this person learned
from Albrechtsberger, Salieri, and Haydn.  Maelzel commissioned this
artist’s Battle Symphony, while the Theater an der Wien [VEEN]
commissioned his Christ on the Mount of Olives, The Creatures of
Prometheus, and Fidelio. FTP, name  this German composer, the identity
of whose “Immortal Beloved” is unknown, but who is known to have
composed the “Emperor” Concerto; “Appasionata” and “Pathétique”
Sonatas; “Choral” and “Eroica”  Symphonies; “Für Elise”; and the
“Moonlight” Sonata in spite of his deafness. Mount Aconcagua Many
believe that this locale’s name comes from the Quechua for “Stone
Sentinel.” The record for  ascending this mountain in the Andes is
just under six hours in an attempt made from its north side. On its
south side is its namesake river, which flows west into the Pacific
Ocean after passing through Chile. At 22,831 feet above sea level, it
is Argentina’s highest peak. FTP, name this mountain, the tallest in
all of South America. Roe verses Wade The two dissenters in this 1973
case were Byron “Whizzer” White and William Rehnquist. Norma
McCorvey, the plaintiff, has since had a change of heart and regrets
her involvement in it. John Roberts  described the case as “settled
law” during his Senate confirmation hearings, although the Supreme
Court  has since ruled on further aspects of its holding, most notably
in Planned Parenthood v. Casey. FTP, name this notorious Supreme Court
decision. Prince Lev Nikolayevich Myshkin (accept The Idiot before
it’s mentioned) This person, a descendant of Madame Yepanchin, spent
four years in a sanitarium in Switzerland.  During his journey back to
Russia, he meets Rogozhin, who is obsessed with Nastasya Filippovna,
whom  Rogozhin later murders. He asks Aglaya Epanchin to marry him,
but later falls out of love with her. FTP,  name this epileptic
character created by Fyodor Dostoevsky whose naïveté can be seen in
the novel The  Idiot. xenon Present in trace amounts in the
atmosphere, this element’s 133 isotope can be used for radioactive
dating. This colorless gas emits a characteristic blue glow in a
plasma discharge. This element was  discovered in late nineteenth
century England by William Ramsay and Morris Travers when they were
evaporating liquefied air. With atomic number 54, this element’s most
famous use is in its namesake flash lamps and it the first noble gas
with which a compound was synthesized. FTP, name this second-heaviest
of the noble gases. The Tin Drum (or Die Blechtrommel) In this work,
the Dusters break into government offices, but they are finally caught
inside a church.  Roswitha Raguna interprets dreams, but is killed by
artillery fire. Agnes has an affair with Jan (pronounced Yan) Bronski,
but they both die. The main character in this novel can break glass
with his shrill voice and decided to stop growing when he was three.
FTP, name this Günter Grass work about Oskar Matzreth and  the title
musical instrument that he plays. Benito Amilcare Andrea Mussolini (or
Il Duce) This person, editor of the Socialist Avanti! from 1912, first
gained fame for opposing the Libyan War.  He switched sides when World
War I came around, founding his own newspaper and becoming a corporal
in the army. After being elected to parliament, his army marched on
the capital, and King Victor Emmanuel III called on him to form a
Cabinet. FTP, name this Italian Fascist leader. Lord of the Flies In
this work, Maurice accidentally kicks sand into Percival’s eye, but
does not apologize. No one knows which twin is which, so their names
are condensed into one: Samneric. Simon is accidentally mistaken for a
beast. Jack Merridew is obsessed with hunting and does not want Ralph
as chief anymore. Piggy’s glasses  break and the conch does too. FTP,
name this tale of boys on an island who resort to savagery; William
Golding’s first novel. the kinetic energy (prompt on “T”) The
Lagrangian is equal to this quantity minus the potential energy. In
gravitational systems, the virial theorem guarantees that the average
of this quantity is equal to negative one half of the average
potential energy. In special relativity, this quantity approaches
infinity as the velocity approaches the speed of light.  The
rotational variety of this is given by one half times I times the
angular velocity squared. FTP, identify this quantity, the energy of
motion, that is often equal to one half times the mass times the
velocity squared. scholasticism (or scholastic philosophy) Berengar of
Tours and John Scotus Eregina were prominent early members of this
school of thought. An important issue in it was the question of
universals, which lead to a nominalist branch supported by William of
Ockham. Peter Abelard and St. Anselm, creator of the ontological
proof, are typical philosophers from this school. FTP, name this form
of philosophy dominant in the Middle Ages, perhaps best embodied by
Thomas Aquinas and the Summa Theologica, and named for its acceptance
in  universities. John Pershing This person was the only man named a
General of the Army during his lifetime and, as a cadet at West Point,
he led the honor guard at the funeral of Ulysses S. Grant. He served
in the Spanish-American War with Theodore Roosevelt and helped
suppress the Philippine uprising. FTP, name this leader of the hunt
for hunt for Pancho Villa; a general who led the American
Expeditionary Force in World War I, and who was nicknamed “Blackjack.”
Greek Old Comedy (prompt on “Comedy”) Cratinus and Eupolis were
recognized as great writers in this style, but none of their plays
survive. By definition, works in this style are not rooted in
traditional myth and their resolutions are also often nonsensical,
such as Dionysus bringing back Euripides since there are no good
tragic poets. Political and social critiques can be found in, FTP,
which ancient Greek style of drama, whose most famous writer is
Aristophanes? Joan of Arc of Orleans (or Jeanne d’Arc d’Orleans) This
military leader secured the support of Robert de Baudricourt, the
captain of the forces in Vaucouleurs, and was able to meet with the
King. After passing an examination and being given troops by Charles
VII, this commander won battles at Patay and on the Loire, but failed
to besiege Paris. Upon being captured by the Burgundians and sold to
the English, this prisoner of war was tried before Pierre Cauchon and
executed for heresy. FTP, name this famous “Maid of Orleans” who heard
the voices of saints. Hera (or Juno) Early on, this being displaced
Dione, patroness of the oracle of Dodona in Epirus. Given the epithet
Eileithyia as the easer of childbirth, this deity was the subject of
the Shield celebration at Samos, of which she was the patron. Homer
describes this goddess as “ox-eyed,” and animals associated with her
include the coocoo, the cow and especially the peacock. FTP, name this
goddess, the Greco-Roman queen of heaven, best known as the angry wife
of Zeus or Jupiter. My Last Duchess At the end of this work, the
narrator discusses having shown the title figure a bronze rendition of
Neptune taming a sea-horse The title figure had “a heart too soon made
glad” as she was impressed by everything she saw, showing the same
approval to all things, including the white mule she rode around on
and a bough of cherries someone gave to her. FTP, what Robert Browning
title female died after receiving a nine-hundred-year-old name from
her husband, a Duke? Johann Chrysostom Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart (or
Johannes Chrysostomus Wolfgangus  Theophilus Mozart) One of this
person’s notable works centers around a wager between Alfonso and
Ferrando and  Guglielmo regarding the fidelity of Dorabella and
Fiordiligi, while another tells the story of a mythical King of Crete.
Besides Idomaneo and Così fan tutte, this artist is notable for the
Haffner, Linz, and Prague Symphonies and the serenade Eine kleine
Nachtmusik. FTP, name this composer who wrote his Jupiter Symphony and
operas The Marriage of Figaro, Don Giovanni, and The Magic Flute in
eighteenth-century Austria. The Times They Are A’Changin’ This work
requests that “mothers and fathers throughout the land” refrain from
“criticiz[ing] what [they]  can’t understand.” Because of this song’s
titular truth, “the first one now / Will later be last,” “the loser
now / Will be later to win,” and “you better start swimmin’ / Or
you’ll sink like a stone.” FTP, name this song which calls on Senators
and Congressmen to “Please heed the call;” the title track from a 1964
album by Bob Dylan, who claims in it that things aren’t remaining the
same. Gaius Aurelius Valerius Diocletianus This person fought under
Carus in Persia and was appointed as a co-ruler after the death of
Numerian.  He gained full control when Carinus was killed by his own
men and among his accomplishments were gaining Britain and checking
the Persians. He tried to restore the gold standard, but his attempts
to regulate prices proved ruinous, which helped result in his most
famous decision. FTP, name this Roman emperor who formally divided the
Roman empire in half. Nicholas Nickleby In this work, the protagonist
and his sister move in with their uncle Ralph after the death of their
father, but the sister Kate soon moves in with Sir Mulberry Hawk,
after which the protagonist teaches at Dothesby Hall. The title
character takes offense at to how Wackford Squeers mistreats the
orphans in his charge, so the title character thrashes Squeers and
takes the orphan Smike home with him. FTP, identify this Dickens novel
with an alliterative title. prions (or protinaceous infectious
particles) The 1997 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine was awarded
for research into these. The disorders they cause are known as slow
infections. This class of disease-causing agents was discovered by
Stanley Prusiner and consists of abnormal proteins that spontaneously
fold normal proteins into their configuration.  FTP, name these
pathogenic abnormal proteins best known for causing fatal familial
insomnia, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, mad cow disease, and other
spongiform encephalopathies. the marginal cost of production A firm’s
profits can be calculated by multiplying the quantity sold by the
vertical distance between the curve for this quantity and the average
cost curve. The area under this curve measures total variable costs.
When the quantity produced is one, this quantity equals the average
cost. This curve passes through the minimum of both average total cost
and average variable cost. FTP, name this quantity that is the change
in cost when one more unit of a good is produced. the Iran-Iraq War
This period began with a revival of the Arvand-Roud waterway dispute
and in Khouzestan, one side created unrest in labor camps and the
Kurdish regions. The attacking side began on September, 22, 1980  with
bombing raids at Tabriz, Ahvaz, and others but, within hours, F-4s
took off from the same bases.  Eventually, one side resorted to poison
gas while the other began attacking Kuwaiti oil fields, after which
the UN stepped in and ordered a ceasefire. FTP, name this 1980’s
conflict between two Arab nations. Hedda Gabler In Act 2 of this work,
a stag party chagrins of Mrs. Elvsted. Eljert loses his manuscript and
gets arrested, but Jurgen Tesman, the title character’s husband, snags
it and gives it to his wife. Eljert tells the title character that he
wants to kill himself, so she gives him a pistol. Upon learning that
the gun accidentally went off, she is blackmailed by Judge Brack and
kills herself too. FTP, name this play by Henrik Ibsen. one, negative
one, and three (accept in any order) Pencil and Paper Ready. What are
the roots of the polynomial f of x equals x cubed minus three x
squared plus x minus three? The rational root theorem can simplify
this problem by showing that 1 is a root. Synthetic division will then
yield a quadratic that can be easily factored. FTP, what are the roots
of the expression quantity x minus one, close quantity, times quantity
x squared minus two x minus three? James Knox Polk Called a “chief
lieutenant” of the Bank War, this person was Speaker of the House from
1835-39 and left when he was elected governor of Tennessee. In order
to avoid war, he sent an envoy to Mexico offering $20 million plus a
damage settlement in return for California and New Mexico. The envoy
was sent away, prompting the Mexican-American War. FTP, name the dark
horse winner of the 1844 Presidential election. Francisco José de Goya
y Lucientes This person dealt with insanity in Yard with Lunatics and
“The Sleep of Reason Produces Monsters”, the latter of which is part
of his series Los Caprichos. Fight with Cudgels, The Dog, and Saturn
Devouring his Children are among the works he painted on the wall of
his house, the Quinta del Sordo, which are called the Black Paintings.
FTP, name this painter best known for The Naked Maja and The Third of
May, 1808; a Spanish painter of the late- eighteenth and early-
nineteenth centuries. The Alchemist In this work, the main character
deceives many characters including Ananias, a Puritan. The scammers
set up shop in Lovewit’s house and, at the end, Lovewit comes back and
takes advantage of the scam  himself. One of the main characters is a
chemist who wants to set up a tobacco shop, Abel Drugger. FTP, in what
Ben Jonson play does Subtle, the title character, fool people into
thinking he can turn anything into gold? chitin Composed of linked
acetylglucosamine molecules, this polysaccharide is stronger than
cellulose. Some insecticides target this compound because of its
absence in humans. Surgical thread that degrades over time is often
made from this naturally occurring, organic polymer. From the Greek
for “tunic,” it is often  embedded in a protein matrix in order to
form an exoskeleton. FTP, identify this compound that makes-up insect
shells and fungus cell walls. François-Auguste-René Rodin An atypical
work of this person is She Who Was the Helmet-Maker’s Beautiful Wife,
while works outside of his typical medium include Thought, which is
unfinished, and The Kiss, both of which depict Camille Claudel. This
artist often had difficulty with critics as The Age of Bronze was
accused of having been “cast from life,” while display of his public
monuments Balzac and The Burghers of Calais proved contentious.  FTP,
name this sculptor best known for The Gates of Hell and The Thinker;
works he produced in bronze in nineteenth-century France. oxidation-
reduction reactions (or redox reactions) Chemical reactions of this
type can be used to power an electric cell since, by definition, they
are able to generate a current. When balancing these types of
reactions, one typically splits a reaction into two half- reactions
and conserves the number of electrons. Most biochemical reactions are
this type of reaction.  Metals rusting and potatoes browning are both
everyday examples of this class of reactions. FTP, identify these
reactions in which atoms change oxidation state. Nikos Kazantzakis In
this person’s novel Toda Roba, he wrote that “I am a mariner of
Odysseus with heart of fire but with mind ruthless and clear.” He
focuses on the dual nature of man in The Odyssey: A Modern Sequel and,
in  1956, he missed out on the Nobel Prize by one vote. FTP, identify
the author of The Last Temptation of  Christ and Zorba the Greek.
Alexis de Tocqueville This political scientist and historian spent a
short time in jail for refusing to swear loyalty to Louis-Napoleon’s
new regime. Gustave de Beaumont accompanied him on a trip to America
and they together  produced an examination of the prison system in
that country; however, a work that this man produced  alone proved
much more important. That book examines the relationship of American
values to democracy.  FTP, name this author whose best-known work is
the four-volume Democracy in America. John Galsworthy This person’s
first important published work that was The Island Pharisees, for
which he used the pseudonym John Sinjohn. Some of his more famous
works include In Chancery and The Silver Spoon, both parts of his most
famous series. The Man of Property is the first book in, FTP, what
author’s Forsyte Saga? Medina In 1908, this city became the Al-Hijaz
Railway’s southern terminus. Its name is the Arabic word for  “city.”
Though it was the caliphate moved from here to Damascus in 661, it was
home of the first four  caliphs. The tomb of the prophet Muhammed is
located in this city, inside of the famous Mosque of the  Prophet
Muhammed. FTP, name this holy city of Islam that is second in
importance to Mecca only. Wilson’s Fourteen Points The brainchild of
Colonel Edward House and a group known as “The Inquiry,” these were a
counter to  the Bolsheviks’ plan to expose a number of secret
treaties. After their creation, they were spread by people working for
General Creel and the Allies agreed to them with a couple of
revisions. The first five were aimed at international affairs, while
eight were aimed at specific geographical questions. FTP, name these
aims of Woodrow Wilson, the last of which was a creation of a League
of Nations. Osirus (or Usiri) This being absorbed Khenty-Imentin, the
previous ruler of Abydos, taking his name as an epithet; he was also
syncretized with Apis to create Serapis. Possessor of the atef-crown,
this deity’s symbols are the crook and flail. After he was
dismembered, this god’s wife sought the aid of Nephthys to re-
assemble  thirteen of his fourteen pieces; this allowed him to
conceive a child and achieve rule over the afterlife. FTP, name this
rival of Seth and husband of Isis; the Egyptian god of the dead. Ohm’s
law In the continuum form of this law, the electric current density is
proportional to the electric field. It does not hold for every
material, but materials that do follow this law are named for it. Both
of Kirchoff’s circuit rules can be derived from this law. Derivable
from the Maxwell’s equations and Newton’s laws, this law is named for
a nineteenth-century German physicist. FTP name this law, one of the
most important  theorems of DC circuit analysis, that states that the
voltage drop is equal to the product of the current and resistance.
Mauna Kea The peak of this mountain is home to many astronomical
observatories, but the natives protest  additional telescopes because
it is the supposed dwelling place of the snow goddess Poliahu. It is
the  highest peak of the Pacific basin, although only about 43% of its
32,000 foot height is above sea level. Its name means “White Mountain”
because the winter snow it collects is unusual for its location,
approximately twenty degrees North latitude. FTP, name this dormant
volcano located on the island of  Hawaii. momentum (prompt on “p” or
“quantity of motion”) The generalized kind of this corresponds to any
degree of freedom of a system in Hamiltonian  mechanics. In special
relativity it is made into a 4-vector by setting the time component
equal to energy.  According to Newton’s second law, the negative
gradient of the potential is equal to the time derivative of this
quantity. During all collisions this quantity is conserved. FTP,
identify this vector described by Newton as the “quantity of motion”
that is classically the product of the mass and velocity. George Smith
Patton, Jr. Because of a wound, this person only saw two days of
actual combat in World War I. It had taken him five years to graduate
from West Point because he had so much trouble with math, although he
was able to memorize long passages of Shakespeare and the Bible. By
World War II, he had become a general, and led  American campaigns
through Northern Africa and Italy. FTP, name this war hero criticized
for his lack of humor and the subject of the 1971 Best Picture-
winning biopic. Igor Fyodorovich Stravinsky In this person’s only
English-language work, Tess Truelove remains faithful to the
dissipated Tom  Rakewell as per its libretto by W. H. Auden. This
artist’s Septet, In Memoriam Dylan Thomas is in the  twelve-tone
style, though the Symphony of Psalms is overtly harmonic. His notable
works include The  Soldier’s Tale, the aforementioned The Rake’s
Progress, Pulcinella, Petroushka, The Firebird, and the riot-causing
The Rite of Spring. FTP, name this Russian composer known for his
tonic innovations. Archibald MacLeish Before moving to Paris, he
published two volumes of poetry, Songs for a Summer Day and Tower of
Ivory. He held several administrative positions during World War II,
including Assistant Secretary of the Navy, and won a Pulitzer for his
Collected Poems 1917-1952, but he is more famous for two other works
that won Pulitzers. FTP, what author won his first poetry Pulitzer for
Conquistador and won for drama with the verse drama J.B. ? David Hume
This person’s 1757 The History of Great Britain was so popular that it
kept him well-off his entire life, while he was an eminent economics
for the Political Discourses from Essays Moral and Political, which
greatly influenced his colleague Adam Smith. This thinker’s Dialogues
Concerning Natural Religion apply his inductive method to theology,
but his best-known work is a distillation of the early A Treatise of
Human Nature. FTP, name this author of An Enquiry Concerning Human
Understanding; a Scottish  empiricist philosopher. Gargantua and
Pantagruel (or Gargantua et Pantagruel) In this work, the main
characters discuss how famous rulers have named cities after them,
including Adrianople and Athens, while searching for the Oracle of the
Holy Bottle, which is located near Cathay in Upper Egypt. One of the
title characters is accompanied by a beggar named Panurge, while the
other is married to Gargamelle. FTP, name this most famous work by
François Rabelais? the theory of continental drift The original
centrifugal model for this phenomenon has long been replaced by the
isotactic “greased onion” model, which relies on the buoyancy of the
asthenosphere. The genesis of this idea is commonly attributed to
Alfred Wegener noticing in 1912 that the Eastern coast of South
America might fit like a puzzle piece into the Western coastline of
Africa. The theory proposes, that, at one time, most of the land on
Earth was one mass called Pangaea. FTP, name this theory that suggests
Earth’s landmasses are moving further apart at the Atlantic Ocean and
closer together across the Pacific. Heathcliff Heathcliff Hindley
originally treats this person like a servant but, after this he leaves
and becomes wealthy, Hindley invites him back to ease his money
troubles. Originally an orphan on the streets of Liverpool, he is
taken in by Mr. Earnshaw and falls in love with Catherine, but he
begins plotting revenge when she marries Edgar Linton. FTP, identify
this vengeful character in Emily Bronte’s Wuthering Heights. six
fifths hours (accept 1.2 hours or other equivalents) Pencil and Paper
Ready. If it takes Greg two hours to do a job and it takes Jimmy three
hours to do the same job, then, assuming they can work independently,
how long would it take them both to do it together?  To solve this
problem, you must first realize that the amount of work equals the
rate at which it’s done times the time spent working, then note that
two peoples’ rate would be the sum of their individual rates.  FTP,
solve the equation one hour equals quantity one half plus one third
times t for t. the Battle of {Stalingrad} The campaign that culminated
in this engagement was known as Operation Blue and, after it, the
aggressors’ commanding officer was captured as a prisoner of war.
After losing this battle, only 90,000 of the 350,000 that made up the
Sixth Army were alive, and only 5,000 of those made it back to Berlin.
Friedrich Paulus was captured in this shattering defeat for Nazi
Germany, a protracted but failed siege.  FTP, name this turning point
of World War II, a defeat which halted Germany’s advance into Russia.
To a Mouse, On turning her up in her nest with the plough The narrator
is sorry that “man’s dominion has broken Nature’s social union” and
allows the title figure, a small, sleek, cowering, timorous beast, to
steal “an odd ear in 24 sheaves”. The title animal’s house is in ruins
and when he found a place beneath the fields, the narrator’s plow
destroyed it. FTP, in what poem by Robert Burns do “the best made
schemes oft go awry?” apocrypha (accept word forms) Notable examples
of these from the Vulgate include the Books of Esdras and Psalm 151,
according to the Council of Trent. They are subdivided into
pseudepigrapha and deuterocanonical works, the latter of which are
accepted by some sects but not others and include Baruch and First and
Second Maccabees and the former of which are universally agreed to be
spuriously attributed to a prophetic author. FTP, what is this term
denoting a set of non-canonical religious books or, by extension, any
work of dubious authority? echinodermata Members of this phylum
exhibit five-fold symmetry and possess an open circulatory system.
Though  they do not have brains, some species do have ganglia. They
reproduce sexually, but many members have remarkable powers of
regeneration. Some species can be cut into pieces with each piece
growing back to a full organism. All members of this phylum have a
water vascular system that aids in locomotion. FTP, sand dollars, sea
urchins, and starfish, are all members of what invertebrate phylum?
d’Artagnan This person from a noble family in Gascony is assaulted by
a man with a scar on his face, who steals this man’s letter addressed
to Monsieur de Treville. He later becomes a soldier under Monsieur de
Essart after proving himself in a fight, and he and his companions
later go on a journey to retrieve Queen Anne’s jewels from Buckingham.
FTP, name this Dumas character who wants to become a musketeer. the
First Crusade This engagement began when Alexius I of Constantinople
feared that his country would fall and called for help from the Pope,
who then issued the Synod of Clermont. Among its principal leaders
were Stephen of Blois and Duke Robert of Normandy and its first target
was Nicaea, which was besieged. After capturing the city they were
after, Godfrey of Bouillon was elected as Guardian. FTP, name this,
the first of many attempts by Christians to take Jerusalem. the
Crimean War During this conflict, a huge flap was created by W.H.
Russell’s published accounts of the prevalence of cholera. This war’s
Battles of Alma River and Inkerman fell closely on either side of its
most famous engagement, the Battle of Balaklava, which Alfred, Lord
Tennyson immortalized in the poem “The Charge of the Light Brigade.”
FTP, name this war ended by the Treaty of Paris in 1856 and fought by
an alliance of England, France, and the Ottoman Empire against Russia.
Arrangement in Gray and Black, No. 1: Portrait of the Artist’s Mother
(accept either underlined part) This painting was bought by the French
state from the artist in 1891 and is still one of a few paintings by
American artists in the Musee d’Orsay. The titular figure is seated in
profile against a gray wall with one of the artist’s etchings and a
black curtain with silver flecks to the right of the sitter’s feet.
She is dressed soberly in black with a white bonnet and gloves. FTP,
name this 1871 James Abbot McNeil  Whistler portrait of a woman rather
close to his heart. Scott Joplin This person’s works Eugenia and
Bethena probably bemoan his bad fortune with wives. Though this
artist’s A Guest of Honor is no longer extant, the Pulitzer Prize-
winning Treemonisha has experienced a  considerable revival, though
its initial failure and syphilis cost this composer his sanity.
Compositions in his characteristic style include the “Paragon”,
“Magnetic”, “Weeping Willow”, and “Pineapple”. FTP,  name this writer
of “Elite Syncopations,” “The Entertainer,” and “Maple Leaf Rag;” an
American  composer known as the “king of ragtime.” Pandora (accept
Epimetheus before “clay”) This being’s daughter Pyrrha married
Deucaleon, thereby surviving the deluge. After being fashioned  from
clay, this person was given a gift by each of the gods and was given
in marriage to Epimetheus, the  brother of Prometheus. With a name
meaning “all-gifted,” she was the first woman in Greek myth. FTP,
name this Greek woman who is most famous for the gift given her by
Zeus, her namesake box, which she  opened, releasing all of life’s
horrors. viscosity It arises from the off-diagonal terms in the
fluctuation dot-product moment and, as such, is an inherently
dissipative effect. It has two types, dynamic and kinematic, the
latter being the former divided by the fluid density. Measured in cgs
units in poise or stokes, a fluid is said to be ideal if this property
is zero for it.  FTP, name this fundamental property of fluid flow;
the internal resistance of a fluid to flow. Samuel Barclay Beckett
This person recounts a dying man’s looking back on his own life in
Krapp’s Last Tape which, like the  novel Watt, was notably not written
in French. This author’s novel trilogy Molloy, Malone Dies, and The
Unnamable preceded his one-act play about the end of the relationship
between Hamm and Clov, Endgame.  FTP, name this Irish author and
winner of the 1969 Nobel Prize in Literature probably known best for
the  absurdist Waiting for Godot. the Congressional Record The four
sections of this publication include the Extensions of Remarks and the
Daily Digest, the former  of which was once the appendix and consists
of remarks not actually uttered during proceedings. First  published
in 1879, it is published daily when its namesake body is in session.
Its accuracy is sometimes at  question – for example, it quoted a
moving speech by Hale Boggs that it claims occurred after Boggs’
death. FTP, name this publication, the official government report of
all the comings and goings of the  United States Congress. Frédéric
Francois Chopin (or Fryderyk Franciszek Szopen) This person’s portrait
was painted by Eugene Delacroix as a pendant to the portrait of his
companion in  1838 and his tandem lessons with Alkan [al-KHAN]
supported Alkan for many years. His many one-off  genre works include
the Opus Fifty-Seven Berceuse, Opus Forty-Nine Fantasia, and Opus
Sixty Barcarolle,  but this composer is much better known for his
twenty-six preludes, four impromptus, and especially fifty-  five
mazurkas and sixteen polonaises. FTP, name this Polish-born Romantic
composer of works for piano  and lover of George Sand. Caravaggio
(accept Michelangelo Merisi before it’s mentioned) This person was
compelled to flee Rome in 1606 after killing a man because that man
beat him at tennis.  This artist’s allegorical Amor Vincit Omnia is a
harangue against pederasty, while works in his  characteristic style
include The Deposition of Christ and The Supper at Emmaus. However,
this painter’s  tenebrism is most famously exhibited in the
revolutionary The Calling of St. Matthew. FTP, name this early
baroque Italian artist born Michelangelo Merisi who is known for the
drastic lighting gradients in his  works. the Nernst equation Derived
by equating partial current densities for reacting species, this
physical law has a ratio of activity coefficients as a crucial
parameter. Derived with a simplification of Goldman’s model, the
standard form of  this relation contains a logarithmic pre-factor of
the kinetic temperature over the number density times  Faraday’s
constant. FTP, name this equation that gives the electrode potential
in terms of a standard  electrode potential; a fundamental equation of
electrochemistry named for a German. Rio de Janeiro (prompt on “Rio”)
The “Girl From Ipanema” is, ipso facto, a girl from this city of five
point six million people. It has the distinction of being the only
city outside Europe to have been a European capital as, in 1808, the
Portuguese royal family fled here escape Napoleon’s imminent siege of
Lisbon. Landmarks include the  thirty-eight-meter-tall statue “Christ
the Redeemer” that sits atop Corcovado Mountain and the Maracanã
Stadium, one of the largest soccer stadiums in the world. FTP, name
this Brazilian locale, home to  Copacabana beach. 1024 (accept two to
the tenth power or equivalents before “FTP”) Pencil and Paper Ready. A
set of ten elements has how many subsets? This problem can be best
approached as a counting problem. Every element of the set can either
be in a subset or absent; thus, in a  given subset, there are two
possibilities for each element. FTP, what the number of subsets, equal
to two to the tenth power? Solomon (or Shlomo) This person took great
advantage of his father’s alliance with Tyre by working closely with
its King  Hiram and received Gezer as a wedding gift from a Pharaoh.
This ruler overcame the intrigue of Haggith,  Joab, and Adonijah by
having himself anointed in his father’s lifetime and “completely
satisfied” the  Queen of Sheba according to First Kings. FTP, name
this king of Israel proverbial for his wisdom and  noted for building
the first Temple of Jerusalem, which was known by his name. the
Kellogg-Briand Pact (prompt on "Pact of Paris") Columbia professor
James Shotwell initially met with one of its namesakes and suggested
what would  become this treaty and in the Senate it was championed by
William Borah of Idaho. Problems with it  stemmed from the facts that
it had no means of amendment, no expiration date, and no mechanism to
enforce its own provisions. FTP, identify this treaty drafted by and
named for the U.S. Secretary of State  and Foreign Minister of France
a decade after World War I; a pact that sought to end war by rendering
it  illegal. Paul Erdıs This person was once denied reentry into the
United States because, when asked “What do you think of  Karl Marx?”
at customs, he replied “I have never met him, but no doubt he is a
great man.” He lived  entirely out of the goodwill of his colleagues
since he never had a home and carried all of his belongings  with him
in a suitcase. In his own personal lingo, children were epsilons and
God was the Supreme Fascist.  He was extremely prolific, in part
because he frequently took amphetamines so he could put in seventeen-
hour days doing math. FTP, name this eccentric Hungarian
mathematician. the United Nations Charter This document's Preamble
features four goals, including “saving succeeding generations from the
scourge of war” and it has 111 articles among nineteen chapters.
Article Sixty-One established the fifty-  four-member Economic and
Social Council, while Article Ninety-Two established the International
Court  of Justice. FTP, name this document that established a major
international organization currently headed by  Kofi Annan. John
Hancock In 1768, this person was accused of transporting contraband
goods on the Liberty and a group of  citizens burned the ship in
protest. He took over as president of the Second Continental Congress
after  Peyton Randolph resigned, but retired a year later due to
health problems. After performing his most  famous action, he
commented “The British ministry can read that name without spectacles;
let them double  their reward.” FTP, name this man, the first signer
of the Declaration of Independence. The Flowers of Evil (or Le Fleurs
du Mal) The narrative voice of this collection’s first work addresses
the reader in the first line, calling him a hypocrite, his likeness,
and his brother; it later accuses the reader of reaching for fantasy.
This work is  made up of three sections, including “Wine, Death, and
Revolt,” where the speaker uses wine to bring  together his spleen
world and ideal world. FTP, name this most famous poetry collection by
Charles  Baudelaire. The Seagull (or Chayka) This work’s main
character aims to become a successful writer, but his love Nina
Zarechnaya leaves  with his rival after his first play fails. The main
character then kills the title animal and lays it at Nina’s feet.
Trigorin then casts Nina aside and, after she leaves Trepilov again,
he kills himself. FTP, name this  play by Anton Chekhov in which
Trigorin likens himself to the title bird. the Thirty Years’ War This
engagement began with the transfer of the control of Bohemia to ten
governors, of whom seven  were Catholic. During its the Danish period,
Schleswig and Holstein were conquered, then handed back to  Christian
IV via the Treaty of Lubeck. Tilly and Wallenstein were opposed by
Gustavus Adolphus, who  entered the war to protect the Protestants,
but was killed at the Battle of Lutzen. All these events transpired
during, FTP, what war, ended by the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648?
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (or Hardy-Weinberg equation or Hardy-
Weinberg principle) 20. Name each of the following branches of
philosophy FTP. This familiar relation states that, in the absence of
genetic drift and certain other factors, the allele frequencies in a
population will be given by p2 [pee-squared], pq [pee-queue], and q2
[queue-squared],  where p and q are the original probability of a
dominant and recessive homozygote, respectively. battery In tort law,
this is defined as any unwanted harmful or offensive touching,
encompassing everything from a flick on the nose to pulling the chair
out from under someone trying to sit. According to Black’s Law
Dictionary, in criminal law, it is “The use of force against another,
resulting in harmful or offensive contact.” Generally consisting of
more than the threat of harm, it is differentiated from assault. FTP,
give this seven- letter term, also a science term for a device that
stores chemical energy for use as electrical energy. Casimir Pulaski
This person’s first fighting in the American Revolution was at the
battle of Brandywine, where his  actions earned him the rank of
Brigadier General. He was later appointed to head South to capture
Savannah and he assumed command after General D’Estaing fell wounded,
though he was later wounded  himself. He joined because he remembered
England’s attempt to partition his homeland. FTP, name this  Polish
“Father of the American Cavalry.” Benedict Arnold After the battle of
Lexington, he organized the governor’s guards in New Haven and
proposed capturing Ticonderoga and Crown Pointe. He later captured St.
John’s and returned to Cambridge, where he proposed to Washington an
expedition into Canada. His siege of Quebec failed and he lost
horribly at Valcour Island, but his later actions were exposed by the
capture of John Andre. FTP, identify this infamous Revolutionary
traitor. Ahmed Salman Rushdie This person expressed a critical
alienation from religion and nationality in Imaginary Homelands and
produced the collection Haroun and the Sea of Stories for a son. Rock
singer Vina Apsara is swallowed-up by an earthquake in this author’s
retelling of the Orpheus myth, The Ground Beneath Her Feet. The story
of Parvati the Witch, Shiva, Saleem Sinai, and the MCC is told in his
Midnight’s Children. FTP, name this author who was the subject of a
fatwa for The Satanic Verses; an Indian author who was in hiding for
almost a decade. the Battle of Okinawa The planning for this battle
included the seizing of the Kerama Islands and the winning side had
sent units to Hagushi Bay as an anchor. The opposing side was led by
Lieutenant-General Ushijima, while the winning side was commanded by
Simon Buckner. On April 24, the Machinato Line was finally breached,
only to expose the Shuri Line. FTP, name this World War II battle
fought in April, 1945, immediately  preceded by Iwo Jima. Johannes
Brahms This person’s “Double” Concerto, Op. 102, is one of the
pinnacles of the violin-cello repertoire, while the St. Anthony
Variations, on a theme of Haydn, are among numerous works of his in
that genre. Though he almost certainly loved Clara Wieck [veak], he
did not act on this even after his friend Robert Schumann, her
husband, died. Creator of one third of the”F-A-E Sonata”, the Academic
Festival Overture, and the  Hungarian Dances, this composer wrote the
German Requiem to commemorate his mother. FTP, name this  Hamburg-born
composer of four Symphonies. enthalpy (prompt on “h”) Conserved in a
throttling process, this quantity entirely determines the temperature
of an ideal gas, but non-ideal gasses can change temperature with this
held constant in the Joule-Thompson effect. This  energetic physical
property is a canonical potential of an open system as it measures the
work available from the system by accounting for flow and expansion
work in its second term. FTP, name this state  function symbolized h
and equal to a system’s the internal energy its pressure times its
volume. the Jordan River The Hasbani, Banias, and Dan rivers merge to
form this river. Because it’s in such an arid region, approximately
three-quarters of its water are used for human purposes. Having the
lowest elevation of any river in the world, pollution has become a
major problem in modern times. FTP, name this river flowing through
the Sea of Galilee and ultimately draining into the Dead Sea; a
Middle-Eastern river that defines the eastern border of Israel. Saint
Augustine of Hippo This person published Reconsiderations towards the
end of his life, having earlier issued Literal  Commentary on Genesis.
Heavily influenced by Cicero’s Hortentius, this religious philosopher
wrote a 410  CE work to defend Christianity from the charge that it
had caused the fall of Rome, City of God. FTP,  name this theologian,
Christian saint, and Bishop of Hippo who is best known for his
autobiographical  Confessions. David Herbert Lawrence This person’s
interest in the American Southwest and Mexico is evident in the works
The Plumed  Serpent and Aaron’s Rod, which features the flutist
Sisson. This writer chronicled the Bragwen family in The Rainbow and
Women in Love, which contains his trademark devices of horse
admiration and moon  madness. The love triangle formed by Claire
Dawes, Miriam Levers, and Paul Morel is central to this  author’s Sons
and Lovers. FTP, name this English writer of Lady Chatterley’s Lover.
Bacchus (or Dionysus or Liber) The patron of Amphicleia, this being’s
epithets include Bromios, Taurokeros, and Tauroprosopos and he
possessed the thyrsus and kantharos. Raised in Nysa, this deity was
born twice, once from the thigh of his father. This god rescued and
wed Ariadne and visited Hades to try to resurrect his mother Semele,
who was destroyed when his father Zeus appeared to her in his full
glory. FTP, name this god whose followers were the Maenads; the Greco-
Roman god of ecstasy and wine. Francis Bacon, Viscount Saint Alban
This person’s notable legal works include The Elements of the Common
Lawes of England and 1641’s  Cases of Treason, while his A Naturall
Historie was published posthumously along with the unfinished The New
Atlantis. This thinker’s Advancement of Learning is the first
important work of philosophy written in English, while his namesake
method was introduced in his namesake tables in the volumes of The
Great  Instauration. FTP, name this philosopher and lord chancellor of
England best known for the Novum  Organum. rolling without slipping
(accept equivalents; prompt on “rolling”) Interestingly, a square can
achieve this state on a caternary. One can easily the angular velocity
of each section of the object undergoing this type of motion because a
certain point is always stationary. This type of motion is useful
because an object undergoing it experiences static friction even
though it is in motion; this advantage occurs because the rolling
object is in contact with a single point of the surface on which it
rolls, and that point of contact is instantaneously stationary at all
times. FTP, name this type of rolling in which an object moves
entirely due to rotation because no translation occurs at the contact
point. Sweeney Todd In recent years, this work has been performed as a
an opera in the United States, most notably in 2002  at the Lyric in
Chicago. In this musical work, Judge Turpin has taken Johanna away
from her natural father and raised her as his own daughter, but her
father comes back to London, seeking revenge against the  people who
have wronged him, with the help of Mrs. Lovett, who bakes pies. FTP,
name the Stephen  Sondheim musical cum opera about the titular demonic
barber. Leaves of Grass Notable stand-alone sections of this
collection include “Youth, Day, Old Age, and Night;” “To Think of
Time;” and one that exclaims “Flood-tide below me! I see your face!”,
“Crossing Brooklyn Ferry.” The  best-known entries in this collection
come from the sections “Inscriptions,” “Children of Adam,” and one
that includes “When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloom’d.” FTP, name
this poetry compilation that  contains “Out of the Cradle Endlessly
Rocking” and “Song of Myself;” the best- known work of Walt  Whitman.
Molière (or Jean-Baptiste Poquelin) Not much is known of this person’s
thirteen-year tour of the provinces, though The Amorous Quarrel and
The Blunderer date from that time. La Grange and du Croisy feature as
spurned lovers in this author’s The Affected Ladies. This writer’s
fortunes turned on a 1658 performance of The Amorous Doctor, which
allowed him to obtain the patronage of the Duc d’Orleans; he would use
that patronage to create The  School for Wives, The Would-Be
Gentleman, The Misanthrope, and Tartuffe. FTP, name this greatest
French comedian. Pinckney’s Treaty (or the Treaty of San Lorenzo)
Article Two defined boundaries for one side, which led to the other
side giving up its land claims South of the Yazoo River. It also
stipulated that six months would be given for any forts on one side in
the other’s territory to be evacuated, but they weren’t abandoned
until Franco-American relations went South. Farmers were elated since
it granted them permission to ship goods through New Orleans. FTP,
name this 1795  treaty between the U.S. and Spain. {Spirit of St.
Louis} The historical figure who commissioned it asked that it be
designed with a purposefully uncomfortable seat so that he would be
less likely to fall asleep at the controls. It lacked any window in
front, and instead a small periscope was used to look forward. While
assembled in California, it bore the name of the Midwestern city that
helped fund its construction. For ten points, name this aircraft that
successfully flew from New York to Paris with Charles Lindbergh as its
pilot. {platelets} (accept {thrombocytes} before given) Patients
suffering from the genetic disorder Von Willenbrand Disease lack a
protein that allows these to work effectively. Aphoresis, the term for
the donation of this blood component, will be ineffective in this case
because the cell fragments themselves are normal. For ten points, name
this component of your blood also called thrombocytes, bits of cells
that function in healthy blood clotting. The {Taming of the Shrew}
Drunkard Christopher Sly passes out in the street and wakes up in a
luxurious bed surrounded by servants. Kate is absolutely mortified
when her fiancé arrives at their wedding late, but by the end of the
play she seems to have forgiven Petruccio for his bad behavior. For
ten points, identify this Shakespearian play, in which the wealthy
Baptista refuses to allow his daughter Bianca to marry before her
older, meaner sister Katerina has done so. {monopoly} This economic
market is characterized by large deadweight loss, an output level
lower than the socially efficient level, the potential for profit in
the long run, and high barriers to entry. The barriers of entry
characteristic of this market include presence of patents, licensing
restrictions and when a firm has control over an essential resource.
For ten points, identify this economic market, which contains only one
seller and shares its name with a popular Parker Brothers board game.
{59} Pencil and paper ready. The Seaver family’s television has
channels 1 through 99, and they want to find something they can all
agree on. Jason only likes channels that are odd numbers. Maggie only
likes channels that are one less than a multiple of three. Mike only
likes channels that are three more than a multiple of four. Carol
likes channels that end in 4 or 9, and Ben likes channels that are one
less than a multiple of six. For ten points, what is the only channel
the Seaver family all likes to watch? You have fifteen seconds.
“{Because I Could Not Stop for Death}” The speaker of this poem and
her escort ride in a carriage, passing such things as children in a
schoolyard, fields of grain, and the setting sun. At the end, the
speaker remarks that centuries have passed since she “first surmised
the horses’ heads/Were toward eternity.” For ten points, identify this
Emily Dickinson poem, the second line of which is “He kindly stopped
for me.” Georges {Seurat} He studied with the sculptor Justin Lequien
and after a few years of study at Ecole des Beaux-Arts and Brest
Military Academy finished his first painting Bathing at Asnieres.
After this work was rejected by the Paris Salon, he allied with
independent Parisian artists, sharing with Paul Signac his ideas
regarding pointillism. For ten points, who is this artist best known
for Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte? Kevin
{Federline} (prompt on Mr. Britney Spears BEFORE it is mentioned) In a
rare fit of success, the clothing line he modeled for the Blue Marlin
clothing company became the best-selling line for Macys and Lord &
Taylor. He’s more used to total failure as when he was eliminated from
the Mob on 1 Vs. 100 for not knowing the dish ran away with the spoon.
That brilliant move was probably nowhere near as bad as his former
reality show with his now estranged wife or his debut album Playing
With Fire which sold only 6,500 copies its first week. PoPoZao (po-po-
zow) indeed. For 10 points, identify this soon-to-be-former Mr.
Britney Spears. {dry ice} (do not accept, do not prompt “carbon
dioxide”) The term was first used by Prest Air Devices, which later
trademarked the term and marketed it to railroad companies as a
coolant. However, the term has lapsed from being trademarked and is
now a generic word for the solid first described by Charles Thilorier,
who opened a container of the liquid form, only to have most of it
evaporate and some solidify. This is because carbon dioxide does not
stay liquid at room temperature, going directly from gas to, for ten
points, this solid state. Giuseppe {Garibaldi} Born on July 4, 1807 in
Nice, he would lead several military expeditions in South America
before returning to Europe, where he would become famous for his
patriotism and role in establishing a nation. Leading a group of
volunteer fighters known as “I Mille”, or more famously, Red Shirts,
he would sweep up from Sicily to conquer the then capital city of
Naples. Although he continued to lend support to conflicts such as the
Franco-Prussian War later in life, he will most likely be remembered
best for his role in uniting the Italian peninsula. Nicolo {Paganini}
Some contemporaries felt that he had diabolical powers, but modern
scholars have hypothesized that he may have suffered from Marfan
Syndrome. That disease would explain the exceptional reach and
flexibility in his hands that enabled him to play three chords across
four strings. The composer of five violin concertos among other
pieces, name, for ten points, this Italian virtuoso violin player of
the 19th century. Aaron {Burr} Born in New Jersey in 1756, he served
in the Revolutionary War accompanying Benedict Arnold on his campaign
in Canada. Like Arnold, he was tried for treason and the judge
presiding over his proceedings was John Marshall. It has been alleged
that Marshall was very lenient in this trial to reciprocate for his
even handed presiding over the Samuel Chase impeachment, when this man
was President of the Senate. For ten points, who was this one time
vice-president, tried for treason for plotting to form a new nation
out of Mexican provinces and lands west of the Appalachians, who is
more infamous for his involvement in a duel? Nancy {Pelosi} Her
father, Thomas D’Alesandro Jr., served as both a U.S. Congressman from
Maryland as well as the mayor of Baltimore. First elected to Congress
in a special election in 1987, she has represented her district in
Congress for the past 20 years. In 2002, she succeeded Dick Gephardt
as House Minority Leader. For ten points, name this Congresswoman,
elected Speaker of the House on November 16, 2006, the first woman in
history to hold this position. {francium} This element was the last to
be discovered in nature, a fact that is not surprising since it is the
second rarest element in the earth’s crust. You can locate it on the
periodic table by knowing that is the least electronegative of all
atoms and that it has the largest atomic radius. For ten points,
identify this element named for a European nation, the heaviest alkali
metal. John {Steinbeck} His first novel was a failure, a story based
on the life of the pirate Henry Morgan. His second book, The Pastures
of Heaven, was no more successful, but it was his first novel set in
Monterey, California, where he would later set stories like Tortilla
Flat and Cannery Row. For ten points, name this masterful American
author, the genius behind such works as The Pearl, East of Eden, and
The Grapes of Wrath. inverted {catenary} (accept “{hyperbolic cosine}
function” before said) Some would look at the Gateway Arch, and
quickly dismiss it as a parabola. But the equation of a parabola does
not describe the Arch. In fact, the Arch is the upside-down version of
what you would get if you hung a chain by its endpoints. For ten
points, what is the proper term for the shape of the Gateway Arch, a
curve that mimics the hyperbolic cosine function? {Medea} She cut her
father-in-law in to pieces, boiled him in a pot with some herbs, and
he emerged healthy and whole. She fooled Pelias’s daughters in to
doing the same to their father, and he emerged as stew. She also
murdered her brother Aspyrtus, her husband’s second wife Glauce, and,
most famously, her own sons. For ten points, identify this sorceress
who betrayed her father in order to help Jason steal the Golden
Fleece. {general relativity} (prompt on relativity) Though the
original equations were published in 1915, it was 1919 before
astrophysicist Arthur Eddington could confirm it, using the occasion
of a solar eclipse to show that light was bent by the Sun. In 1922,
its discoverer added an extra term to oppose the potential expansion
of the universe, a move he later called his “biggest blunder.” Merging
Newton’s law of universal gravitation with Einstein’s earlier work,
for ten points, name this theory based on gravitation being a
manifestation of curved space-time. {Machu Picchu} Its name comes from
an indigenous word for Old Peak. Archaeologists have determined that
it was not a working-class city, but may have functioned as a resort
town for the elite of the empire. For ten points, name this city
rediscovered in 1911 by Hiram Bingham, a notable city of the Inca
Empire. {spiral} Pencil and paper ready. Consider the following
equations in polar: first, r = theta; next, r = 1 / theta; next r = e
^ theta [READ: “e to the theta”]; lastly r = 5 * theta. For ten
points, all of these equations describe what type of curve that grows
further away from the origin each time it completes a revolution.
{collagen} Scientists have identified as many as twenty-eight types of
this substance. Type Four can be found everywhere from the lens of eye
to the kidney, Type Two is cartilage, and Type One makes up several
things, including tendons and scar tissue. It also plays a role in
maintaining the skin, and its decomposition contributes to aging. For
ten points, name this structural protein, the most abundant protein in
your body. {Eureka Stockade} A direct cause of this event was full
white-male suffrage for elections in the lower house. The revolt
occurred for a variety of reasons including high equipment prices,
poor working conditions, and the high price of a mining license. For
ten points name this watershed event in Australian politics, an 1854
miner’s revolt in Ballarat, Victoria. {Sequoia} He was a silversmith,
not a wordsmith, by trade, but it was in the field of language that he
would make his great contribution. He spent twelve years on his
creation, at first attempting to create a character for every word but
later opting to represent each syllable with a character instead.
Within a few years of his work’s completion, his system was adopted by
tribal schools. For ten points, identify this creator of the Cherokee
writing system. {Moby Dick} or, The Whale The title character is
responsible for the loss of Boomer’s arm, and he is easily
distinguishable by his pale complexion and heavily wrinkled brow.
Cabin boy Pip goes crazy after being left afloat for hours and the
Parsee harpooneer Fedallah makes an ominous prediction about two
hearses. For ten points, Tashtego, Queequeg, Starbuck, and Ahab are
among those lost at sea in what Herman Melville novel? {gamma rays} or
{gamma radiation} These were discovered by Paul Ulrich Villard in 1900
while he was studying uranium. He also found that they were not
deflected by magnetic fields. The Vela satellites discovered them
coming from deep space. They can damage cells and cause cancer, and
William Bragg showed they were similar to X-rays in their ability to
ionize gas. For ten points, identify these high-energy photons
produced from matter-antimatter annihilations. {Bridge to Terabithia}
The title place derives its name by way of C.S. Lewis from a tree in
the Bible. It was written as a way for the author to help console her
son after the death of one of the son’s friends. The traumatic event
in the book takes place while one of the main characters is in
Washington D.C. with his music teacher, Miss Edmunds. While he is
there, his best friend, Leslie goes to their imaginary kingdom
accessible by swinging on a rope. Unfortunately the rope breaks over
the swollen creek, leaving Jesse to deal with the resulting tragedy.
For 10 points, what is this Katherine Paterson book that won the
Newberry Award in 1978 and is the basis for an upcoming Disney film?
The {General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money} In this book,
the author states that the level of output in an economy is determined
by three factors—a person’s marginal propensity to consume, the
marginal efficiency of capital, and the interest rate. It argued that
an increase in government expenditures could stimulate an economy
caught in a long-term recession, and it ushered in a revolution in
macroeconomic thought. For ten points, name this masterwork of British
economist John Maynard Keynes. {Kokopelli} A roving trickster, he is
at least three thousand years old.  Depictions feature this flute
player with a humpback, which is possibly a seed pouch symbolizing his
fertility role to cultures in his desert home.  For ten points, name
this supernatural figure found in rock carvings in the American
Southwest and generally associated with the Hopi and Zuni tribes. {Les
Demoiselles d’Avignon} This piece was influenced by African masks and
ancient Iberian sculpture and it broke decisively with art of the past
by showing that art can either accept beauty or reject it. Originally
it was to be titled Philosophical Bordello and include men, but the
artist simplified it to focus on five prostitutes. The fractured
planes of the women are mixed with equally jagged planes representing
the background curtains. For ten points, name this seminal work of
Pablo Picasso. {Anna Karenina} The author of this book incorporated
many details from his own life into it, such as the fact that he made
his wife read all his journals before they married. It ends with the
main character’s lover going off to fight the Serbs who have revolted
against the Turks. The main character uses her brother to arrange a
divorce from her husband, but Stepan’s attempts are thwarted by the
clairvoyant the husband has employed on the advice of Countess Lidia
Ivanova. The lover and she continue to grow apart, so much so that she
commits suicide by throwing herself on the railroad tracks. For 10
points, what is this novel by Leo Tolstoy? {Ideal Gas Law} It is most
accurate for gasses with low molecular weights that are in high
temperature and low pressure environments. The van der Waals equation
is a corrected form that takes into account that gas particles have
non-zero volumes and experience intermolecular forces. For ten points,
name this law, expressed as PV = NRT. Graham {Greene} Some of his
comments about a young Shirley Temple earned his magazine a lawsuit
for libel, and he claimed to have often played Russian roulette while
studying at Oxford. His 1926 conversion to Catholicism had little
effect on his behavior, which remained as dissolute as ever, but did
influence such novels as The Power and the Glory and Brighton Rock.
For ten points, identify this Englishman, author of The Quiet American
and The End of the Affair. The {Gilded Age} This era had no specific
beginning or ending, but is usually characterized as being bookmarked
by two depressions twenty years apart. Though the wealth of this
period is evidenced by the American increases in consumption, acts of
philanthropy also boomed during the era, akin to what Carnegie termed,
“The Gospel of Wealth.” Mark Twain and Charles Dudley Warner wrote a
book about it subtitling it “A Tale of Today.” For ten points, what is
this late nineteenth century era in American history? Zane {Grey} This
author was born in Ohio, played minor league baseball in West
Virginia, and practiced dentistry in Pennsylvania. Though he is
closely associated with the American West, he did not move to
California until 1920, ten years after his first western, Heritage of
the Desert, was a hit. For ten points, name this prolific author of
over ninety novels and pulp westerns, the author of Riders of the
Purple Sage and a book about his ancestor, Betty Zane. {Penguin} The
exact number of species of this animal is unknown, but varies from 16
to 19 and all are native to the Southern Hemisphere. A member of the
phylum Chordata, they have wings, which they use as flippers because
they cannot fly. On November 29, 2006, the US Fish and Wildlife
Service was petitioned to add 12 of its species to the endangered
species list due to global warming, habitat destruction, and oil
spills, amongst other reasons. For ten points, name this animal, also
the star of the Best Animated Movie nominee Happy Feet. {Rosie} the
Riveter Norman Rockwell’s depiction showed her taking a break on the
job and munching on a sandwich. The image you are probably more
familiar with was modeled after Geraldine Doyle in 1943, a factory
worker in Michigan, and features the phrase “we can do it.” For ten
points, name this American cultural icon who sought to recruit women
into the workforce during World War II. {cold fusion} It was
originally reported by two German scientists in 1925, but they later
admitted the helium they had measured was from the background. Public
awareness was raised in 1989 by the Fleischmann-Pons experiment, in
which electrolyzed heavy water using a palladium cathode released far
more energy than was expected. However, independent attempts to
confirm these low energy nuclear reactions have always failed. For ten
points, give the common term for nuclear reactions at low temperature.
{I}sabel {Allende} Born in Lima, Peru, she had a job translating
romance novels from Spanish to English, which she was fired from for
making the heroines more intelligent and independent than the source
suggested. In 1994, she published Paula, a memoir written as a letter
to her daughter who died two years earlier. Tragedy has served her art
well as she started writing her best-known work while her grandfather
was on his deathbed. Now an American citizen, she was exiled to
Venezuela following the coup that overthrew her uncle. For 10 points,
who is this author of The House of the Spirits? {150} feet Pencil and
paper ready. You are standing 20 feet away from a 10-foot tall
lamppost, and, while looking at the very top of the post, you notice
it lines up in your field of vision with the top of a building 280
feet beyond the lamppost. You decide to figure out the height of the
building and realize that using similar triangles makes the problem a
lot easier. For ten points, find the height of the building. You have
15 seconds. Eugene {O’Neill} He came into this world and left it in a
hotel room. His father was a stage actor and he grew up behind the
scenes at the theater. His early plays were put on by the Provincetown
Players, but he did not publish any plays until 1920’s Beyond the
Horizon, for which he won his first Pulitzer. For ten points, identify
this prolific American playwright of such works as The Iceman Cometh
and Long Day’s Journey Into Night. {Crimean} War Mary Seacole financed
her own trip to this war, setting up her British Hotel and providing
food, shelter, and medical care to soldiers right at the front. She
did this after she was rejected from a nursing program led by Florence
Nightingale. Despite these women’s best efforts, tens of thousands of
French, British, Turkish, and Russian soldiers died in the war that
saw Sevastopol besieged. For ten points, identify this mid-nineteenth-
century European war, which featured the Charge of the Light Brigade.
Miles {Davis} Born in the St. Louis suburb of Alton, an early teacher
of his taught him his distinctive style of playing without any
vibrato. In the mid-1940s, he set off for New York and became the
newest trumpeter in Charlie Parker’s band. He would later break
sharply from that Bebop style on fusion records such as In A Silent
Way and Sorcerer. For ten points, name this legendary jazz trumpet
player behind classic records such as Kind of Blue. {Elephant} They
were first employed in battle in 1100 BC by civilizations in present-
day India. Alexander the Great used them in his armies and during the
Punic Wars, they were armored and carried a crew of three men. Julius
Caesar created his own defense against them: ordering his men to cut
at their legs with axes. For ten points, name this war animal used by
Hannibal to cross the Alps. {8} Pencil and paper ready. David is
taking a 20-question multiple choice test on which 5 points are
awarded for each right answer, and 2 points for each question left
blank, with nothing earned for an incorrect response. David wants to
score at least 75, and is worried that he may have left too many
questions unanswered. For ten points, what is the maximum number of
questions David could leave blank and still have a chance at a 75? You
have fifteen seconds. {Gilgamesh} One-third human, he meets his
closest friend when he bests him in a wrestling match. He takes
advantage of almost every woman in the city he rules but foolishly
rejects the advances of a goddess. After he and his best friend kill
the Bull of Heaven sent by the enraged Ishtar, the gods decide that
one of them must die as punishment. For ten points, name this Sumerian
demi-god who is so grief-stricken by Enkidu’s death that he embarks on
a quest for immortality. Aldous {Huxley} Both his grandfather Thomas
and brother Julian were prominent biologists, and his great-uncle was
Welsh poet Matthew Arnold. It is not surprising then, that this
hallucinogen-loving Englishman is best known for a literary work about
a scientifically advanced society. His other novels include Crome
Yellow, Eyeless in Gaza, and Point Counter Point. For ten points,
identify this writer of dystopian classic Brave New World. Lovie
{Smith} (AKA the man who should have had Mike Martz’s job three years
ago. Not that we’re bitter.) He donates ten tickets for every one of
his team’s games to the American Diabetes Association. In the late
1990’s, he developed with Tony Dungy the Tampa 2, a simple defense
that emphasizes speed. He parlayed the success of that defense into a
short stint as the Defensive Coordinator for the 2001 NFC Champions.
Five years later, as a head coach, his team would win the same title.
For 10 points, name this current coach of the Chicago Bears. The
{Million Man March} It was widely criticized by the American left as
anti-semitic, racist, and sexist. This event was largely seen as a
response to conservative Republican gains after the 1994 elections.
The leader who convened it threatened to sue the police force present,
because they later made public statements estimating the population of
protesters as low as 400,000, which is of course much less than the
title of the protest would have one believe. For ten points, name this
protest in October 1995, led by Louis Farrakhan. {Chicxulub} crater
(pronounced “cheek-shoo-loob”, accept close or phonetic
pronunciations, accept {impact hypothesis} before “meteor”) Luis
Alvarez studied deposits at the Cretaceous-Tertiary boundary and found
an abnormal amount of iridium. He proposed that a meteor had struck
the Earth, but for years the theory was considered unlikely. Then a
reporter noted that geophysicist Glen Penfield may have already
discovered the sought-after crater. Studies showed that this crater on
the Yucatan peninsula was about the right size and age. For ten
points, name this crater, likely the site of the meteor impact that
killed the dinosaurs. Randle Patrick “RP” {McMurphy} He was sent to
prison for gambling and battery, and he boasts to the staff that he
was never convicted of statutory rape. He organizes a secret fishing
trip with a group of patients and is punished for disobedience with
electroshock therapy. He acts unfazed by the treatments, but is
ultimately lobotomized. For ten points, name this protagonist in Ken
Kesey’s One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest. {5} Pencil and paper ready.
Two circles are drawn such that their centers are a distance of 5 from
one another, and the two intersection points formed by these two
circles are a distance of 2 from one another. These four points form a
quadrilateral whose diagonals intersect at a right angle, also called
a kite. For ten points, find the area of this quadrilateral. You have
fifteen seconds. {Passions} It was controversial and audacious from
the get-go when in its premiere episode, it shamelessly used the death
of Princess Di as a plot point for one of its characters. In August of
2005, it featured two of its characters riding a coffin like a boogie
board during a tsunami that was caused by the half- mortal Endora
Lenox. The only acting nomination this show ever received from the
Daytime Emmys was for the performance of Juliet Mills, and she played
a 300 year old witch who brought a doll to life and named it Timmy.
For 10 points, name this soon-to-be-cancelled NBC soap. {alkali
metal}s (do not accept “alkaline earth metals”, prompt on “Group 1”
before said) These elements are highly reactive and are rarely found
in nature in their elemental form. Removing one electron gives them a
stable noble gas electron configuration, and hence they frequently
bond with halogens in a 1 to 1 ratio to form basic salts. Hydrogen,
despite being in the same periodic group as these elements, is
typically not included because of its very high ionization energy. For
ten points, give this name for Group 1 of the periodic table,
including rubidium, potassium and sodium. {Odin} Like Archimonde, he
is hung by the neck from a tree, but after nine days he returned.
According to the Havamal, that is how he gained knowledge of the
runes, an accomplishment that is overshadowed by other feats such as
forming the world and the creation of man.  For ten points, name this
first of the Aesir, a well-armed, one-eyed deity who will fall at
Ragnarok. Toni {Morrison} In one of her novels, women are given non-
traditional Biblical names like Magdalene, Pilate, and First
Corinthians. In her best-known work, Halle, the Pauls, Sixo, and Sethe
make a disastrous attempt to escape Sweet Home. Sethe later becomes an
outcast after she chooses to kill her children rather than see them
returned to slavery. For ten points, identify this American Nobel
laureate, author of Song of Solomon, The Bluest Eye, and Beloved.
{conjecture} Collatz’s wonders whether a certain algorithm will always
eventually end. Others include the P-NP problem, the twin prime one,
and the lack of odd perfect numbers. Grigori Perelman recently proved
Poincaré’s. Goldbach’s is that every even number can be written as the
sum of two primes. For ten points, give this name for a proposed
mathematical result that has yet to be proven. {Devil’s Tower} The
story went that six young girls were being chased by an angry bear.
The Great Sprit took pity on them, raising the earth the girls stood
on by several hundred feet in order to save them. Geologists,
meanwhile, have found that it is made of igneous material and some
hypothesized that is an extinct volcano. For ten points, name this
national monument in Wyoming that appeared in the movie Close
Encounters of the Third Kind. John {Milton} His Elkonoklastes was a
piece of propaganda that supported the execution of Charles the first.
He also worked as a government censor for a time, which may surprise
you considering his dedication to freedom of the press expressed in
his famous work, Areopagitica. For ten points, name this figure of
English history and literature, the man behind Samson Agonistes and
Paradise Lost. The {Acts} of the Apostles It contains the first use of
the word “Christian,” referring to the Church of Antioch, and is
addressed to Theophilus. The book opens with the designation of
Matthias as Judas’s replacement and contains the story of Stephen, the
first martyr, while the second half focuses on the missions of Paul of
Tarsus. Attributed to Luke, for ten points, name this fifth book of
the New Testament, recounting the early days of the Christian church.
On the {Origin of Species} It was originally published on November 24,
1859 and all 1,250 copies originally printed were sold out within
hours. The author mustered up a second edition of the book a mere six
weeks later, and the words “by the Creator” were strategically
inserted into the final sentence. It was not until the fifth edition
of the book that the phrase “survival of the fittest” was added. For
ten points, identify this book outlining the theory of evolution,
written by Charles Darwin. {Steinway} and Sons (prompt on piano until
brand) The model D is the largest at almost nine feet long, and costs
over one hundred thousand dollars. Those on a budget can opt for their
more affordable sister brand, Boston, which is produced in Japan but
offers the same high quality resonance and pitch. For ten points, name
this New York-based company founded in 1853, the producers of some of
the world’s finest pianos. The {Lord of the Flies} The name of this
novel is a translation of the Hebrew name "Beelzebub.” Its characters
include two twins who are referred to as one person, a group of so-
called littluns, the evil Roger, and a more rational bespectacled
fellow. The butchering of the sow and the shattering of a conch shell
symbolize the boys’ into anarchy that ultimately kills Piggy in, for
ten points, what William Golding allegory? {Kenya} The Kikuyu rose up
in rebellion in 1947 and despite being an ethnic group fighting the
ruling white minority of this nation; these rebels were deemed Mau Mau
communist rebels. The rebellion broke the spirit of its British
colonizers who atypically passed power to the African majority instead
of the white minority. Jomo Kenyatta became president of this new
nation in 1963 and promptly massacred the ethnic Somali in the
northeast. For ten points name this East African nation whose capital
is Nairobi. The {Color Purple} The central character’s stepdaughter-
in-law goes to jail after punching the mayor, and Nettie unknowingly
meets her niece and nephew after befriending the missionaries Samuel
and Corinne. From Samuel, Nettie learns that Alphonso is only her
stepfather and that her real father was lynched by a jealous mob.
Nettie’s sister Celie finally meets her biological children at the end
of, for ten points, what Pulitzer Prize winning novel by Alice Walker?
James Clerk {Maxwell} In 1931, the centennial anniversary of this
physicist’s birth, Albert Einstein described his work as “most
profound and the most fruitful that physics has experienced since the
time of Newton.” He is credited with developing the world’s first
colored photograph in 1861, and he found that the speed of
electromagnetic waves in a vacuum was a constant. For ten points,
identify this Scottish man who devised a set of equations expressing
fundamental laws of electromagnetism. George Bernard {Shaw} This
winner of the 1925 Nobel Prize for Literature was a vegetarian who
opposed the abuse of animals for either scientific research or sport.
A leftist, he supported the 1888 London Match Girl's Strike and was a
prominent member of the socialist Fabian Society.  Although he was
born in Dublin, only one of his play's John Bull's Other Island is set
in Ireland.  For ten points, identify this playwright “Man and
Superman” and Pygmalion. {North Dakota} It has the most churches per
capita of any state in the union but its population has been
decreasing steadily over the past few decades. Interestingly, it
possesses the only state-owned bank in the nation, but its economy
suffers because graduates of the state university in Grand Forks tend
to move elsewhere. For ten points, name this plains state whose
capitol is Bismarck and whose largest city is Fargo. {Rolle}’s Theorem
(do not prompt on Mean Value Theorem) A cannonball launched from the
ground will at some point be traveling strictly horizontally. A
rollercoaster must be flat at some point, since its finishing height
is the same as the starting height. These are both examples of a
theorem that states that a differentiable function which is the same
at its endpoints must have a derivative of zero at some point. For ten
points, name this special case of the Mean Value Theorem. {Joy}
Darville Turner As a young girl, she won Balboa & Sons Mother and
Daughter Prettiest Pretty Princess Pageant, and kept the trophy until
her ex-husband blew it up with a bottle rocket. Her current husband
graduated college at the age of 14 and has a pet turtle named Mr.
Turtle. She runs a manicure business out of her trailer and has two
children, one named for his father’s vehicle and the other named for
her ex-husband who was clearly not the biological father. For 10
points, name this character played by Jamie Pressley, the ex-wife of
the title character on My Name is Earl. {transcendentalism} A reaction
in part against the Unitarian Church and its teachings, this movement
was based heavily upon the ideas of German Idealism. Prominent members
of the movement included Bronson Alcott and Margaret Fuller, who was
one editor of its newsletter, The Dial. For ten points, identify this
American literary movement, the most famous members of which were
Ralph Waldo Emerson and Henry David Thoreau. {Komodo dragon} Don’t get
into a spitting match one of these: zoologists have shown that their
saliva contains fifteen strains of pathogenic bacteria. Their bite
eventually kills their prey, anything from birds to large mammals,
which they are then able to locate with a keen sense of smell. No need
to worry too much about encountering one, though. Their population is
limited to the islands of Rinca and Gili Motang in Indonesia. For ten
points, name this reptile, the world’s largest living lizard. {Kublai
Khan} In the year 1260, both he and his brother declared themselves
the ruler of their empire and battled for three years. Emerging
victorious, he founded the Yuan Dynasty and moved its capital to
present day Beijing, though he later launched unsuccessful campaigns
against Japan and Vietnam. For ten points, name this so-called “last
of the great Khans,” the Mongol leader and grandson of Genghis Khan.
{Bassoon} (also accept {fagotto}) Charles Darwin played this
instrument and hypothesized that earthworms would work harder if they
heard it played daily. Pitched in C, it has a relatively large range
of about three and a half octaves. Constructed of wood with a conical
bore, its unusual sound has been employed for comic effect. For ten
points, name this instrument used to represent the Grandfather in
Peter and the Wolf, one of the double reed instruments. The Battle of
{Okinawa} Referred to in various languages as, “The Typhoon of Steel”
or “The Rain of Steel,” it was the largest amphibious assault during
the Pacific campaigns of the World War II. Neither the Japanese nor
the Americans expected it to be the last major battle of the war; the
Allies were in fact planning Operation Downfall, the invasion of
Kyushu and Honshu. But this never occurred, and the last days of June
were the last days of this battle, and the last days of American
battling in the Pacific. For ten points, name this infamous battle
following the Battle of Iwo Jima. {One Hundred Years of Solitude} This
novel’s fortieth anniversary was recently marked in Cartanega de
Indias, one of its author’s hometowns, with a lavish banquet at which
guests could sample “delicacies from Macondo.”  In the novel, many
similarly lavish parties are hosted by a man named Jose Arcadio, one
of five characters with that name.  Outnumbering even the Jose Arcadio
Buendias are the more than twenty Aurelianos in, for ten points, what
major work of magical realism by Gabriel Garcia Marquez?
{Stratigraphy} It has two primary subfields, one of which is based on
fossil evidence in rock layers, while the other deals with the type of
rock. The theoretical basis for it was established by Nicholas Sterno
through the laws of superposition, the principle of original
horizontality, and the principle of lateral continuity. For ten
points, name this branch of geology, the study of how rock layers,
also known as strata, form. Washington {Irving} He popularized the
nickname “Gotham” for New York City, even though he died long before
the creation of Batman. More famously, he wrote a collection of short
stories titled The Sketch Book of Geeffrey Crayon and a history of the
state of New York under the pseudonym Diedrich Knickerbocker. For ten
points, identify this author of such stories as “Rip Van Winkle” and
“The Legend of Sleepy Hollow.” Rep. Mark {Foley} In 1999, he was the
first public figure to misquote Al Gore as having claimed to have
invented the Internet. In 2006, Republicans of his home state urged
him to consider a Senate run instead of eventual candidate Katharine
Harris, but he declined. It would not have mattered, as Republicans
lost that seat in Florida and this man resigned from his House seat in
disgrace. For ten points, who is this former Florida member of the
U.S. House who resigned amidst a scandal of inappropriate contact with
House pages? {3.5} or {7/2} Pencil and paper ready. Ben has pitched in
three baseball games this season. In the first, he pitched five
innings and allowed two runs. In the second, he pitched seven innings
and allowed one run, and in the third, he pitched six innings and
allowed four runs. Given that a pitcher’s earned run average is nine
times the number of runs he has allowed, divided by the number of
innings he has pitched, for ten points calculate Ben’s ERA. You have
15 seconds. Gustav {Kirchhoff} This 18th century German physicist
contributed to the field of spectroscopy with his three laws
describing the spectral composition of light emitted by incandescent
objects. He also coined the term “black body” to describe objects that
absorb all electromagnetic radiation falling on them, but he is
perhaps most famous for his work in electricity. For ten points, name
this scientist who gives his name to two laws of electric circuitry.
Dr. Benjamin {Spock} He served as a navy psychiatrist during World War
II, but was later prosecuted for aiding draft dodgers during Vietnam.
As the 1972 presidential nominee of the People’s Party, he spoke out
in favor of health care reforms. It is not surprising that health care
for mothers and children was a key issue for him, as he was best known
as the author of books like The Common Sense of Book of Baby and Child
Care. For ten points, name this noted pediatrician, not to be confused
with a crew member of the U.S.S. Enterprise. {Caravaggio} (accept
Michelangelo {Merisi}) Known as much today from his police records as
other documents, he was thought of as a dangerous rebel and denounced
by contemporary artists as “the anti-Christ of painting” due to his
outspoken disdain for the Classical masters. The stark contrast of
light and dark that characterized his style became known as tenebrism
and had wide-spread impact across Europe. For ten points, name this
Italian Baroque painter of The Conversion of St. Paul and The Death of
the Virgin. {Volga} River The area around it is a fertile valley that
produces a large amount of wheat and is also an important source of
minerals, including salt. Its tributaries include the Oka and Sura
Rivers, and cities along it include Samara, Kazan, and Yaroslavi. For
ten points, name this longest river in Europe, widely considered to be
the national river of Russia. {isomer}s The structural varieties of
these can have drastically different effects. For example, theobromine
is a caffeine analog found in chocolate, while dimethylxanthine [die-
meth-ill-zan-theen] is a bronchodilator used in the treatment of
respiratory disease. The enantiomeric varieties however, will always
have identical physical properties except for the direction in which
the two molecules rotate polarized light. These are examples of, for
ten points, this class of compounds with the same chemical formula,
but different structural formulae. Abbie {Hoffman} He said, “Avoid all
needle drugs. The only dope worth shooting is Richard Nixon.” He was
one of the Chicago Seven arrested for conspiracy charges during street
protests during the 1968 Democratic National Convention. He used
comical antics to protest the actions of the U.S. government: at one
protest he got 50,000 people to attempt to levitate the Pentagon with
the psychic energies of their minds. He said the Vietnam War would end
once the building turned orange and began to vibrate. He also co-
founded the Youth International Party, known as the Yippies. For ten
points, name this activist and author of Steal This Book. The {Tin
Drum} The narrator’s first love marries his stepfather and his second
love is killed at Normandy. Men fish for eels with a horse’s severed
head and people crowd a nightclub called the Onion Cellar. It is
either the German Alfred or the Pole Jan who has fathered Oskar, but
it is definitely his mother Agnes who gives him his beloved toy
instrument for his third birthday, the day he decides to stop growing
forever. For ten points, identify this German novel by Gunter Grass.
James Fenimore {Cooper} This prolific author’s tales of history, the
sea and the frontier made him one of the most popular writers of his
time, but this did not stop Mark Twain from cataloguing a list of his
literary offenses many years later. Twain was especially hard on his
novel The Deerslayer, a personal favorite of this writer. For ten
points, name this man behind the Leatherstocking Tales, including The
Last of the Mohicans. {pancreas} In addition to its functions in
digestion, it is an all-star of the endocrine system: its PP cells
produce a namesake polypeptide, the delta cells produce somatostatin,
and the alpha cells make glucagon. A fourth type of the cell in the
Islets of Langerhans, the beta cell, produces insulin. For ten points,
name this organ. {Hajj} or {pilgrimage to Mecca} During its execution,
men are expected to wear only an Ihram, two sheets of white cloth, and
a pair of sandals. After a visit to Mount Arafat, participants go to
Muzdalifah to gather pebbles for the following days’ ritual. At Mina,
they throw those pebbles at the jamarat, a practice known as the
Stoning of the Devil. An optional journey to Medina is practiced by
many, but is not required. All this is part of, for ten points, what
Pillar of Faith that each Muslim is expected to make at some point in
their life if able? {Reflecting Telescope} (prompt on “telescope” or
“optical telescope”) The Dall-Kirkham type uses a concave elliptical
and a convex spherical mirror. The Ritchey-Chrétien (CRAY-tee-en)
model uses two hyperbolic mirrors and is free of coma and spherical
aberration. Both of these are specialized versions of the Cassegrain
type, which involves a primary parabolic and a secondary hyperbolic
mirror, which reflects light back through a hole in the primary mirror
into the eye of the observer. For ten points, name this type of long-
range instrument, whose invention was credited to Isaac Newton.
{Edward I} As a young man, he and his wife, Eleanor of Castile, took
part in the Eighth Crusade. This man proved himself as a military
commander by defeating Simon de Montfort and other rebels who had
taken away much power from his father. This man then conquered Wales
and also managed to keep the Scots subdued for most of his reign. For
ten points, name this king of England, nicknamed Longshanks and who
was succeeded by his incompetent son, Edward II. {Boo Radley} His
father is dead and he lives in a large house with his older brother,
Nathan. He begins leaving objects in a tree knot in front of his
house, and even sews a local boy’s pants back together. At the book’s
climax, he saves that boy and his sister by stabbing their attacker
Mr. Ewell. For ten points, name this savior of Jem and Scout Finch,
the reclusive hero of Harper Lee’s To Kill a Mockingbird.
“{Irreplaceable}” The narrator of this song offers to call a cab for
the person she’s talking to. She does this because she doesn’t want
him to take her Jaguar. She makes it a point of telling him that
everything in the closet is her stuff and all his stuff is in a box to
the left. The narrator and he are breaking up because he cheated on
her, and after she bought him the aforementioned Jag. The ex and her
argue in front of the house, with him telling her she will never find
another as good as him because he is the title condition. For 10
points, what is this song by Beyonce? Jackson {Pollock} He cited
Jung’s theories of archetypes as a major influence over his artistic
output. The Museum of Modern Art issued an album of jazz he listened
to in his studio, because that music played such a substantial role in
his method of action painting, in which paint was frequently dripped
and poured onto large canvasses. For ten points, name this 20th
century American artist, a key player in the abstract impressionist
movement whose “No. 5, 1948” became the world’s most expensive
painting last year. {quasars} Over 100,000 of these are known to
exist, all of which have high redshift, implying that they are
billions of light years from Earth. That we can still see them implies
that they are the brightest objects in the universe, and 3C 273 was
the first one discovered. The leading theory is that they shine due to
the accretion of material into black holes. For ten points, identify
these quasi-stellar objects found at the center of distant galaxies.
John {Donne} In his own lifetime, he was best known as a bureaucrat
and clergyman, and his poems circulated privately among members of the
court. A master of the conceit, he famously compared two lovers to the
legs of a compass and the sun to a pesky busybody. For ten points,
identify this seventeenth-century English metaphysical poet, whose
works include the Holy Sonnets, “The Sun Rising,” and “A Valediction
Forbidding Mourning.” Alfred Lothar {Wegener} Born in Berlin in 1880,
and receiving his early training from in astronomy from the University
there, he became interested in meteorology and pioneered the use of
weather balloons to track air masses. However, his most famous work
was in the field of geology, where, through observations of
geographical features and fossil records, came up with the theory of
continental drift. FTP, name this pioneer in the field of plate
tectonics. Haruki {Murakami} He operated a jazz club called “Peter
Cat” for eight years, and one of his novels is named after a song by
the Beatles. He interviewed 63 survivors of the Sarin gas attack on
the Tokyo subway after returning to Japan from Princeton University,
where he wrote his best-regarded novel, in which Toru Okada’s cat and
wife leave him. For ten points, identify this contemporary Japanese
novelist, author of Sputnik Sweetheart, Norwegian Wood, and The Wind-
Up Bird Chronicle. The Championships, {Wimbledon} In 2006, it
contracted with Ralph Lauren for uniforms, the first time they ever
entered into such a contract with an outside company. It is planning
to add a retractable roof to one of its venues, enough time to be used
in 2012 as part of the Olympic Games. Apparel from it is adorned with
green and purple, the official colors, and competitors in it are
expected to wear white, which has proven problematic for such
flamboyant personalities as the Williams sisters and Andre Agassi. For
10 points, name this only major tennis tournament played on grass in
England. Claes {Oldenburg} Born in Sweden, he moved to America when he
was six years old and later studied at the Art Institute of Chicago.
Though his approach differed from Andy Warhol and Roy Lichtenstein, he
is also associated with Pop Art. For ten points, name this sculptor
famous for making soft sculptures of normally hard objects and for
enlarging everyday objects, most notably his Spoonbridge and Cherry in
Minneapolis and Saw, Sawing in Tokyo. Alexander {Hume} This man is now
primarily known as a philosopher and economist but his History of
Great Britain is what gained him fame during the Lowland
Enlightenment. This man’s Fork attempts to prove that no certainty
exists due to the fallibility of our senses. Most people emphasize
this Scot’s influence on skepticism and naturalism but his influence
in economics must also be noted. For ten points, name this Scottish
man who received much criticism for his economic condemnation of the
mercantile system. {22} Pencil and paper ready. At midnight, the hour
and minute hands of a standard 12-hour wall clock align. You wonder
how many times over the course of a day this happens. You realize that
it happens once in the one o’clock hour, once in the two o’clock hour,
and so forth. Knowing this, and only counting midnight once, how many
times a day do the hour and minute hands of an analog clock line up?
You have 15 seconds. Upton {Sinclair} He had little success in
politics. In 1906, he garnered three percent of the vote as a
Socialist candidate for Congress in New Jersey, and later gained the
Democratic nomination for governor of California, but lost the general
election. Where he failed to enact change politically, he succeeded
socially, largely thanks to a novel he serialized in the socialist
newspaper The Appeal to Reason. For ten points, name this notable
muckraker, the author of The Jungle. The Battle of {Coral Sea} Even
though it was a tactical defeat, this battle was a strategic victory
for the Allies because it eliminated the Japanese threat to Australia.
A turning point in the War in the Pacific, it was fought in early May
1942 and set the stage for the Battle of Midway, one month later. The
USS Lexington was lost and the USS Yorktown was damaged in this, for
ten points, the first naval battle fought exclusively with aircraft.
{vacuole} In some protists, the contractile type of these is capable
of pumping water out of the cell in order to maintain proper osmotic
pressure. In animal cells, the structures are able to fuse with the
lysosome to aid in digestion. Their role is the most important in the
plant kingdom, where they are surrounded by the tonoplast and help to
maintain turgor pressure. For ten points, name this membrane-bound
organelle, a glorified storage sac. {Carnot} cycle (prompt on Carnot
engine) This process happens in two reversible steps and two adiabatic
steps, the first of which is a reversible isothermal expansion of the
gas. Though it is only theoretical, Rudolf Diesel tried to imitate it
in his work. For ten points, name thermodynamic cycle that reflects
the perfect engine, the creation of a 19th century French chemist.
{New Brunswick} We do not associate it with French, but it is the only
Canadian province that has both English and French as official
languages. It is located south of the Gaspe Peninsula, west of Nova
Scotia and north of Maine. Large cities here include Moncton, the much
larger Saint John, and the capitol, Fredericton. For ten points, name
this maritime province of Canada. {Walden II} Two communities, Twin
Oaks and Los Horcones, were founded in response to this work and its
author cited Francis Bacon’s Atlantis as his inspiration. The novel
faced a rocky road to publication, and it was only published after its
author agreed to also write a textbook for the same company, called
Science and Human Behavior. For ten points, name this 1948 Utopian
novel by the psychologist B.F. Skinner, whose title alludes to a work
by Thoreau. {Shaka} Zulu When his mother became pregnant, she at first
thought she had contracted an intestinal parasite. This is why his
name means “intestinal beetle” in his native tongue. It was not a
parasite after all, but one of the 19th century’s great military
minds, who would gain control of his clan by defeating his brother.
For ten points, name this ruler who won his battles in present day
South Africa, the most famous commander of the Zulus. {Byzantine}
style/art The transition to this style was marked by a decrease in the
influence of Greco-Roman traditions and shallow backgrounds with
little allusion to optical space. Architecture emphasized the arch and
the dome, and interior decoration was mainly mosaics of religious
scenes with characteristic dangling feet and golden halos. For ten
points, name this style of the Eastern Roman Empire exemplified by the
Justinian mosaic at San Vitale. {15} miles per hour Pencil and paper
ready. Alex is walking to the grocery store 5 miles from his home to
pick up some milk and cookies at an average rate of 5 miles per hour.
After walking for 12 minutes, he is spotted by his uncle who picks him
up and drives him the rest of the way at an average rate of 30 miles
per hour. You can calculate Alex’s average speed by noting that his
uncle drove him four miles, and thus it took 8 minutes. For ten
points, find Alex’s average speed over the whole trip. The {Rape of
the Lock} In addition to several Shakespearean-inspired names, Uranus
has a few moons named for characters from this poem, including
Umbriel, a gnome bearing magical gifts, and Belinda, the heroine of
the work. Another major character in the poem is the Baron,
perpetrator of the titular misdeed. For ten points, name this mock
epic written by Alexander Pope which records the theft of a single
curl. {deadweight loss} (accept {excess burden}) According to a study
conducted by economist Joel Waldfogel in 1993, national purchases of
Christmas gifts created a large amount of this economic quantity,
equal to about 10-18% of all Christmas purchases. Other causes of it
include monopoly pricing, taxes, and binding price ceilings or floors,
all of which can cause a market to deviate from the normal equilibrium
output level. For ten points, identify this loss of economic
efficiency that results when a market is not producing the socially
optimal amount of goods. {Tammany} Hall Symbolized in political
cartoons by a tiger, it was first led by Aaron Burr, who used its
power to support the Jeffersonian Republicans in New York. Beginning
in 1839, it became a proponent of the Democratic Party, which it
continued to associate with into the twentieth century. For ten
points, name this political machine of New York City, whose notable
leaders included the infamous Boss Tweed. {Simple Harmonic} motion
(prompt on harmonic motion) They can be described by the differential
equation “The second derivative with respect to time of position x is
equal to a constant omega squared times the position x,” an equation
whose solution is a cosine function of x. Non- idealized examples in
nature include grandfather clocks and the mass-spring systems. For ten
points, give this type of motion, in which the restoring force on an
object is proportional to the distance from the origin. Kenneth
{Starr} This Texan currently serves as dean of Pepperdine University
School of Law. He was an influential lawyer and federal judge in
Washington D.C. and was a well-respected moderate, which lead George
H. W. Bush to consider him for the Supreme Court seat that went to
David Souter. That respect would not last amongst liberals following
his investigations in the death of Vincent Foster and an Arkansas land
deal. For ten points name this man who gained his greatest amount of
fame for his self-titled report that he submitted to Congress which
recommended impeaching President Clinton for his role in the Lewinsky
scandal. George {Eliot} (accept Mary Ann {Evans} if answered before it
is mentioned) In 1880, just months before her death, she changed her
surname yet again to Cross after marrying a man twenty years younger
than her. She had already taken on a new name once before, because she
felt her writing would be taken more seriously that way, and her first
novel, Adam Bede, was very well received. For ten points, name this
Victorian British author whose real name was Mary Ann Evans, the woman
behind such novels as Silas Marner and Middlemarch. shuttle
{Discovery} It has flown more missions than any other spacecraft, with
33, and notable missions include John Glenn’s 1998 flight, seven trips
to the International Space Station, and the return to space following
both the Challenger and Columbia disasters. In 1990, it launched the
Hubble Space Telescope and returned to service it twice. The oldest
space shuttle still in operation, for ten points name this spaceship
which shares its name with the ship from 2001: A Space Odyssey as well
as nautical ships operated by James Cook and Henry Hudson. {Noble
Eightfold Path} It can be represented by the spokes of the Dharma
wheel, with sharp edges to cut through ignorance. Falling into the
categories of wisdom, ethical conduct, and mental discipline, the
Buddha explains that its completion leads to two further stages: right
knowledge and right liberation. For ten points, identify this Buddhist
teaching, consisting of right understanding, intention, speech,
action, livelihood, effort, mindfulness, and concentration. {Ricky}
Bobby Born in West River, North Carolina, he was born in the back of
his father’s car, a 1969 Chevrolet Chevelle Malibu. In 1996, he
replaced Ted Cheveaux in the #26 car and finished his first race in
third place. He has two sons by his ex-wife Carley, a ten year old
named Walker and another boy named Texas Ranger. Carley dumped him for
his best friend Cal who for years suffered as runner-up to this
character by employing their “Shake n’ Bake” method on the NASCAR
circuit. For 10 points, what is this title character of the film
Talladega Nights played by Will Farrell? The {Prisoner’s}{Dilemma} By
analyzing the game, Robert Axelrod classified certain strategies as
successful based on the stressed placed by each on retaliating,
forgiving, being nice, and being non-envious. These strategies can
only apply to the situation in which an unknown number of games will
be played. Otherwise, both players will rationally defect, but be
worse off each time. For ten points, name this conceptual model game
in which two rational players have the option to cooperate or defect.
Hector {Berlioz} He was acclaimed as a conductor by his contemporaries
and was also a prolific writer of musical criticism. This Frenchman
was strongly influenced by literary works such as Byron's Childe
Harold and several of Shakespeare’s plays. The opera Les Troyens and
song cycle Les nuits d'été are some of the lesser-known works of, for
ten points, what composer of Harold in Italy and Symphonie
Fantastique? {10} Pencil and paper ready. Willy Wonka wants to know
how many Oompa Loompas he needs to help him mix chocolate for his new
Awesome Bar. He wants enough chocolate for one bar mixed in three
minutes, but he takes twelve minutes to mix enough. Each Oompa Loompa
takes forty minutes to mix the amount of chocolate needed for one
candy bar. For ten points, how many Oompa Loompas does Willy need
working with him mixing chocolate? You have fifteen seconds.
{Lawrence}, Kansas It was founded in 1854 by a future governor of the
state and quickly became a center of the abolitionist movement. Less
than ten years later, the town would be almost entirely ransacked and
burned by Confederate outlaws. The rebirth of the city would be
sparked by the founding of a university there in 1865, whose mascot
took on the name of the anti-slavery forces, the jayhawks. For ten
points, name this college town in Kansas. Francis {Perkins} This New
York Industrial Commissioner led progressive reforms by expanding
factory investigations, reducing the female work-week to 48 hours, and
championing minimum wage and welfare laws. It was in this position
that a New York Governor and future President came to know her.
Holding the post of Secretary of Labor for a record 12 years, she
chaired the President’s Committee on Economic Security. For ten
points, name this woman who oversaw the construction of the Social
Security Act of 1935, the first woman to hold a Cabinet position.
{Dada} The outlook of this art movement paralleled the
psychoanalytical views of Sigmund Freud and Carl Jung. Before being
absorbed into the Surrealist movement, it developed independently in
New York and Zurich and was intended to shock viewers by its lack of
conventional meaning. For ten points, name this artistic movement that
used commonplace materials as readymade sculptures, epitomized by the
work of Marcel Duchamp. {Maori} In 2002 these groups launched a legal
campaign against Lego’s Bionicles line, claiming that Bionicles’ use
of their language was unjust and degrading. This was just the latest
of their conflicts with the West, which date back to Captain Cook’s
visits to their homeland in the 17th century. For ten points, name
these indigenous people from New Zealand. {Mars} He sired fratricidal
twins with a virgin, which earned him patronage of a city.  Velazquez
painted him as middle-aged and flabby, a contrast to the usual image
of this god of agriculture and war. One of the three primary deities
of Rome, he is ordinarily depicted as a heroic warrior.  For ten
points, name this Roman god often associated with Ares. {law of
cosines} Euclid wrote down a version of it, despite lacking
trigonometry, providing separate cases for obtuse and acute triangles.
Independently rediscovered and proven by François Viète in the 16th
century, it is a generalization of the Pythagorean Theorem and can be
proven using it. For ten points, identify this triangle law,
associating the square of a side of any triangle with the sum of the
squares of the other two sides and the angle between them. {Spoon
River Anthology} (accept just Spoon River if buzzed before “commercial
success”, prompt if after) It contains 212 characters in all,
including Andy the Nightwatch, the African American townsman Shack
Dye, A.D. Blood, and the Unknown. It achieved commercial success upon
its publication in 1915, and it became even more popular when it
inspired a radio show called Epitaphs. One character, Anne Rutledge,
was inspired by a woman whom local legend states was a love interest
of young Abraham Lincoln. For ten points, name this poetry collection
about a small Illinois town written by Edgar Lee Masters. {Miller
Urey} experiment Who knew that a bit of water, hydrogen, ammonia and
methane were all you needed to execute one of the key experiments in
20th century biology. These ingredients were combined in a flask,
heated, cooled, and exposed to high voltages to simulate lightning.
The two namesake scientists found that their mixture had formed
organic compounds such as amino acids. This describes, for ten points,
what landmark experiment that synthesized organic materials from non-
organic compounds? James {Baldwin} The oldest of nine children, he,
like his character John Grimes, did not always get along with his very
religious stepfather. With the help of Richard Wright, he moved to
Paris in 1948, where he wrote his second novel Giovanni’s Room. Active
in the Civil Rights Movement, his essays about race relations were
collected in books like Going to Meet the Man and The Fire Next Time.
For ten points, identify this American writer of Go Tell it on the
Mountain and Notes of a Native Son. {Barbaro} Dr. Dean Richardson and
the New Bolton Center received the Joe Palmer Award for their
treatment of him. He broke his leg in three places around the ankle,
which required a Locking Compression Plate and twenty-seven screws to
make it possible for him to walk on again. Unfortunately, it would not
be enough to save this patient who broke the leg while running the
Preakness. For ten points, who was this 2006 Kentucky Derby winner
that was euthanized on January 29? John {Cage} He moved to Europe as a
young man but returned to the U.S. after being inspired by reading
Whitman’s “Leaves of Grass.” He was a favorite student of Arnold
Schoenberg and studied under him for several years. For ten points,
who is this composer that one does not need years with a tutor to
perform some of his pieces, such as Four Minutes, Thirty Three
Seconds, which merely consists of several minutes of silence. {muon}
Although technically not a member of the class, this particle has
historically been referred to as a meson, because its mass lies
between that of the electron and the proton. It is closer to the
former, however, in that it has its own type of neutrino. After the
neutron, it has the longest lifetime of any unstable particle, thus
allowing it to penetrate the Earth’s atmosphere via cosmic rays, a
fact that led to their 1936 discovery by Carl Anderson. For ten
points, name this elementary particle, a lepton about 207 times as
massive as the electron. James {Meredith} When the conflict centered
on him ended, two people were dead, 48 soldiers had been wounded and
30 U.S. marshals had been shot. President Kennedy sent the marshals
and soldiers to protect him from rioters incited by Governor Ross
Barnett’s opposition to his enrollment. Although he played a pivotal
role in the Civil Rights Movement, he was frequently at odds with its
leadership and opposed the term “civil rights.” For ten points, name
this man who graduated in 1963, the first African-American student at
the University of Mississippi. Baron de La Bredé et de {Montesquieu}
OR {Charles de Secondat} He popularized the terms “feudalism” and
“Byzantine Empire.” He criticized Parisian society in his 1721 work
“The Persian Letters” but is most famous for his political theory. He
believed the best form of government was a monarchy and saw French
society as divided into three classes: the monarchy, the aristocracy,
and the common people. For ten points, name this Enlightenment thinker
who conceptualized “separation of powers.” free {radical}s They are
created by the homolytic cleavage of a bond, a process that is common
in peroxides. Involved in combustion, they also play a significant
role in polymerization reactions and must be eliminated in termination
steps. Examples include ethynyl, C2H, and molecular cyanide. For ten
points, give the term for an atomic compound with an unpaired
electron. Marshal Phillipe {Petain} (also accept Henri {Petain}) In
1935, he was appointed Secretary of State after serving for a year as
Minister of War. In 1914 he was a mere colonel but by 1917 he would
become commander of his nation’s armies. His rise to power stemmed
from successes at the Battle of the Marne and, more famously, at
Verdun. Twenty-eight years later he would be sentenced to death for
treason, only to have his sentence commuted to life in jail by Charles
De Gaulle. For ten points, name this Savior of Verdun and leader of
Vichy France. Gille de la {Tourette’s} syndrome The English author
Samuel Johnson was said to have suffered from this disorder, which he
described as being plagued by the “bellowing of a whale.” While the
exact cause of this syndrome is unknown, it is most likely related to
the over-activity of dopamine and has been linked genetically to
obsessive- compulsive disorder. For ten points, name this neurological
syndrome characterized by motor and vocal tics. {Metaphysics} A.J.
Ayer claimed its propositions were meaningless in Language, Truth, and
Logic, though Karl Popper claims it’s more accurate to say its
propositions are not fallible, testable, or provable. Ontology is the
main segment of this branch of philosophy. Its name is derived from
the Greek phrase translated as “those on nature.” For ten points, name
this branch that is concerned with the nature of the universe and more
specifically what is man’s place and role in it all. {54√3} (READ:
{fifty-four} times the square {root} of {three}) Pencil and paper
ready. A regular hexagon is inscribed in a circle of area 36π. To find
the area of the hexagon, one should realize that two radii form a
sixty-degree angle, thus dividing the hexagon into six congruent
equilateral triangles. For ten points, find the area of the inscribed
hexagon. You have 15 seconds. {Sense and Sensibility} After John
inherits Norland, his dependent mother and sisters are sent to Barton
to live with Sir John Middleton, a more generous relative. Edward does
not love Lucy Steele but is too honorable to break their engagement,
while Mr. Willoughby has a genuine affection for the emotional
Marianne but is too cheap and selfish to marry her. Elinor Dashwood is
stuck being the reasonable one in, for ten points, what 1811 Jane
Austen novel? {Atacama} Desert Many of the mountains that run through
it are completely free of glaciers even at altitudes above 20,000 feet
due to this area’s extreme dryness. On average it receives less than a
millimeter of rain per year, and between the years 1571 and 1971, it
received no measurable rainfall at all, the longest drought in
recorded history. For ten points, name this desert, arguably the
driest desert in the world but certainly not the hottest, located
along the coast of Chile. {Mughal} Empire In about 1700 this empire
expanded to its greatest height under Aurangzeb who fought his way
into southern India. The illiterate ruler, Akbar, was the real
architect of this empire since he not only consolidated power but also
made peace between the Muslim conquerors and its Hindu subjects. For
ten points name this central Asian empire founded in 1523 by a soldier
of fortune named Babur. Arthur {Dimmesdale} Knowing that he has sinned
but afraid to confess, this character began to punish himself,
physically and mentally. While the mother of his child accepted her
punishment and began a life of good works, this man descended into ill
health, made worse by the attentions of his lover’s husband, Roger
Chillingworth. For ten points, identify this creation of Nathaniel
Hawthorne, the father of Pearl in The Scarlet Letter. {.648} or {64.8
percent} or {81/125} Pencil and paper ready. The Bears and the Tigers
are competing in a best- of-three series, in which the Bears have a
60%, or 3/5, chance to win each game. The first team to win two games
will win the series, and there are no ties. For ten points, calculate
the probability that the Bears will win the series. You have 15
seconds. The {Great Wave} (accept {Thirty Six Views of Mount Fuji}
before “title object”) Its artist selected landscapes as his main
focus due to the increased political and moral censorship during the
Tokugawa period. The scale of the title object in relation to people
reflects the power of the sea, while this woodblock print’s bold
linear designs and flat areas of color would later influence the
Impressionists. For ten points, name this work by Katsushika Hokusai,
from his Thirty Six Views of Mount Fuji. Battle of {Gettysburg} Some
say that John Buford won this battle on its first day by claiming the
high ground for his forces. The second day saw some of the bloodiest
fighting on hills such as Culp’s Hill and Little Round Top as the
Confederate forces marched against General Meade’s entrenched forces.
The third day of the battle saw a Confederate charge that was so
costly it forced the Confederate forces to withdraw. For ten points
name this Pennsylvania battle in 1863, considered the turning point of
the American Civil War. {Olympus Mons} It was discovered in the 19th
century by observers, but was not named until 1972, when its true
size, about that of the state of Arizona, was discovered. Due to this
immense size and shallow slope, the peak of this feature would be
visible from the planet’s surface, and thus can only be viewed
properly from space. For ten points, name this martian shield volcano,
which, at about three time the height of Mount Everest, is the tallest
mountain in our solar system. {Angels in America}: A Gay Fantasia on
National Themes (accept {Angels In America: Millenium Approaches}
until “Ethel Rosenberg sings”) Harper takes a drug-induced vacation to
Antarctica, away from her severely repressed husband Joe Pitt. Joe’s
boss Roy Cohn hoards the experimental new drug AZT but conceals his
AIDS diagnosis from his fellow Reaganites. Ethel Rosenberg sings a
Yiddish lullaby for a man who celebrated her execution. Prior Walter’s
New York apartment is invaded by dead ancestors and an Angel. For ten
points, identify this Tony award winning play by Tony Kushner, set
during the early days of the AIDS epidemic. Spiro {Agnew} Frank Zappa
firmly believed that this man sold his soul to the devil. He was born
to an influential Greek family in Maryland, where he later served as
governor. A staunch defender of the Vietnam War, he became the second
vice president to resign from office so that he could plead guilty to
tax evasion. For ten points name this man who was succeeded by Gerald
Ford. Feast of the {Immaculate Conception} It is through this feast
that Mary is the patron saint of the United States. As such, it is a
holy day of obligation no matter what day of the week it falls on.
Contrary to popular belief, it is not related to the virgin birth of
Jesus, though it does fall during Advent. Celebrated on December 8,
for ten points, name this Christian feast that celebrates Mary being
free from original sin. {Henry the Navigator} or {Henry the Seafarer}
He was appointed governor of Algarve. This grandson of John of Gaunt
became obsessed with Africa and its potential. He was obsessed with
the legend of Prester John but was probably more interested in
stealing the lucrative slave trade away from the Muslims. For ten
points, name this prince of Portugal who began Europe’s obsession with
Africa and began a series of explorations to map to the coast of
Africa. {golden ratio} or (1 + rt(5))/2 [READ: “{one plus} the square
{root} of {five, over two}”, prompt on phi before mentioned] It’s not
1, but it is the arithmetic mean of its reciprocal and its square. The
limit of the ratio of successive Fibonacci numbers, its continued
fraction consists of all ones. If a line segment is divided so that
the ratio of the whole to the large is the same as the ratio of the
large to the small, both ratios will be equal to this number. Often
denoted by phi, for ten points, name this number one less than its
square and one more than its reciprocal. {saccharine} You should
always wash your hands after biology labs, but sometimes not washing
your hands can have gratifying results. In 1879, two Johns Hopkins
researchers studying toluene derivatives tasted something on their
hands after working in the lab: something about 300 times sweeter than
sucrose. For ten points, name this substance once thought to be a
carcinogen, an artificial sweetener found in Sweet N’ Low. {Lenz}’s
Law In electromagnetism, this law is an important complement to the
Law of Electromagnetic Induction. If this principle were not true, the
current induced by a changing magnetic flux would ultimately violate
conservation of energy principles. For 10 points, name this law that
states that a current induced by a changing magnetic flux will travel
in the direction that opposes that change in magnetic flux.
{Turkmenistan} Reporters Without Borders claimed in 2005 that it had
the second worst press freedom conditions in the world, behind North
Korea. They even went so far as to call its then leader a central
Asian “Kim Jong-Il.” The comparison is apt for both formed a cult of
personality, although Kim Jong-Il, unlike the leader of this nation,
never wrote a national epic or renamed the words for “bread” and
“April” for his mother. For ten points, what is this former Soviet
nation which will hold elections next week to replace President for
Life Saparmurat Niyazov. {The Queen} Alexandre Desplat wrote its score
in three weeks after the former composer took several months. Among
the interesting details in Peter Morgan’s script is that the title
character’s husband refers to her as “cabbage” and the jersey worn by
one character is a reference to his constituency. The film opens with
a man painting the title character’s official portrait, who laments
that she cannot vote. The painter notes that while she cannot vote, it
is her government which consoles her, despite the fact that that
government will be run by Tony Blair. For 10 points, what is this film
that deals with Elizabeth II’s response to the death of Princess Diana
and stars Helen Mirren? Betty {Friedan} Born in 1921 in Illinois, she
became active as a youngster in small Marxist and Jewish circles. In
her 2000 memoirs, she admitted that her husband, Carl, had beaten her
during their marriage, though she once remarked, “Man is not the enemy
here, but the fellow victim.” She viewed the traditional home-maker
role as stifling to women, and wrote about this, along with other
topics in a 1963 book, which some say sparked a second wave of
feminism. For ten points, name this author of The Feminine Mystique.
{Mercury} Mariner 10 was the only spacecraft to ever approach it, so
less than half of its surface has been mapped. Even so, a good deal
about its environmental conditions are known, such as the lack of
atmosphere and extreme temperature variation, ranging from -180°C at
night to 430°C in the day. For ten points, which planet recently
became the smallest in our solar system due to a decision by the
International Astronomical Union? {1 in 247} Pencil and paper ready.
Miniature poker is played with a deck of only number cards, 1 through
10, in each suit, for a total of 40 cards and each player is dealt 3
cards. The best hand is three of a kind. Knowing that there are 10
ranks one can get a three of a kind in, and 4 ways to choose the three
of that rank a player gets dealt, what is the probability that a
player will be dealt 3 of a kind? You have fifteen seconds. {Kuala
Lumpur} Found at the confluence of the Klang and Gombak rivers, all
pre-1881 buildings in this city have been destroyed by widespread
fires and extreme flooding. It is now the home of several distinctive
buildings like the Dayabumi and the Putra World Trade Centre, and its
Golden Triangle commercial center is the site of Petronas Towers. For
ten points, name this largest city in Malaysia. Theodore {Dreiser} In
1935, the Warsaw Public Library ordered the burning of all of this
man’s works because of his Communist sympathies. That was not Warsaw,
Poland, but Warsaw, Indiana, where this Indiana-born author lived
during the 1880s. He also wrote the Trilogy of Desire, which contained
The Financier. For ten points, name this American author known for his
dense, wordy style, the author of such classic tomes as Sister Carrie
and An American Tragedy. the {golem} In modern Hebrew, the word means
cocoon, but it derives from an older word that means raw material.
Often inscribed with holy words, medieval rabbis were said to use them
as servants. Isaac Bashevis Singer wrote about one, but a more well-
known tale says that a Prague rabbi created one to defend that city’s
Jews. For ten points, name this creature from Jewish folklore, a
creature created from mud or clay. {camera obscura } In the eleventh
century, a curious Egyptian found that he could use one to observe an
eclipse. It was not until the Renaissance that many scientists and
later artists took notice. Kepler devised one out of a tent for
studies of the sun, Da Vinci may have used one and Vermeer was thought
to rely on one extensively in his paintings. For ten points, name this
technique and device used in art, a pre-cursor of the modern camera
whose name in Latin means “dark chamber.” A {Portrait of the Artist as
a Young Man} Originally titled Stephen Hero, the final version of this
work opens with memories of bedwetting and moo-cows. In addition, its
narrator, largely based on the author, was renamed after a figure from
Greek mythology, Daedalus. For ten points what is this 1916 novel
about growing up in Ireland, a classic novel by James Joyce? {3/5}
Compromise It originated in 1783 as an amendment to the Articles of
Confederation as a new way to determine each state’s tax obligations,
but failed. It was proposed into the Constitution by James Wilson, and
is often credited with giving the Southern states disproportionate
power in the years following ratification. Explicitly repealed by the
Fourteenth Amendment, this is, for ten points, what compromise that
decided representation and taxation by assigning slaves a fractional
amount. {Le Chatelier’s} Principle If more hydrogen is added to a
system of hydrogen gas and nitrogen gas, the system will produce more
ammonia to move towards the original amount of hydrogen in the system.
If heat is removed from the previous reaction, which is exothermic,
the system will react in such a way to produce more heat to compensate
for the lost heat. For ten points, these are examples of what
principle of chemistry, which states that a chemical system will shift
in order to minimize the effects of changes in its temperature,
pressure, or chemical concentration? Edward Teller [or Teller Ede]
This man blamed Jane Fonda for a heart attack in a Wall Street Journal
piece called “I was the only victim of Three-Mile Island.” He had a
proposal to create an artificial harbor at Port Hope, Alaska in
Project Chariot. He won the first Ig Nobel Prize for Peace because of
his work developing what he called a “Super.”  This man is the second
namesake of an effect which breaks the degeneracy of coordination
complexes by elongating (*) one axis. He controversially testified
that he opposed extending a Top-Secret clearance during Oppenheimer’s
security hearings. This leader of Operation Plowshares, a program for
the peaceful use of nuclear weapons, was a supporter of SDI. He co-
names a fission-fusion nuclear bomb design with Polish physicist Ulam.
For 10 points, name this Hungarian-American physicist and “Father of
the Hydrogen Bomb.” The Rape of Europa The central figure of this
painting assumes a pose that is derived from the artist’s earlier
works Miracle  of the Jealous Husband and The Martyrdom of Saint
Lawrence. In the left background, a group of nymphs can be seen on
land in front of some cliffs, and at the bottom of this work, a
monstrous, brown sea creature opens its mouth at the central figure.
Of the two flying putti in the top left of this work, both hold bows
but only the one on the left holds arrows, and the title character
looks up at those putti. The title figure (*) grips a red robe in one
hand while lying on an orange robe. In the bottom left, another putto
rides a fish near the tail of a white animal that appears to be
looking at the viewer; that animal is a bull. For 10 points, name this
painting of an abduction scene by Titian. Fathers and Sons [or Otcy i
Deti] In order to ease tensions after an argument in this novel, one
character learns how another man once gave a ring engraved with a
sphinx to his lover and, after that lover died, received the same ring
with a cross drawn over the sphinx. Two characters in this novel are
offered a ride home in a carriage, during which they ask the driver if
he beats his wife and if his wife beats him. One character in this
novel used to love the fickle (*) Princess R and later wounds his leg
in a duel after seeing another man kiss a housekeeper. Another
character in this novel dies after an autopsy on a corpse that has
typhus; as he dies, he is kissed by his beloved Madame Odintsova. This
novel ends with both Katya and Fenichka getting married. For 10
points, name this novel about Arkady Kirsanov and the nihilist
Bazarov, written by Ivan Turgenev. Otto the Great [or Otto I; or Otto
der Grosse; or Otto II of Saxony; prompt on “Otto”] Historians such as
Hans Naumann attributed a renaissance to this man and his successors.
He married his heir to a niece of John I Tzimiskes called Theophano.
Soon after this ruler’s ascension, he fought wars against the Dukes of
Bavaria and Franconia, both of whom were called Eberhard. He allied
with Louis IV to beat Hugh the Great of Paris.He spared Conrad the
Red, who later made a crucial cavalry counterattack against an attack
on his baggage train. He subjugated Berengar of Ivrea to rescue the
kidnapped (*) Adelaide, whom he married, making him King of Lombardy.
This ruler inherited the Duchy of Saxony upon the death of his father,
Henry the Fowler. He relieved a siege of Augsburg by beating a Magyar
army at the Battle of Lechfeld. For 10  points, name this ruler
crowned by Pope John XII in 962 as the first ruler of the Holy Roman
Empire. Charles Sanders Peirce In one paper, this man outlined
adherence to “Cartesianism” as a major problem of philosophy because
it’s impossible to begin philosophy with complete doubt. This man
listed feeling, reaction and meditation as “Firstness”, “Secondness”,
and “Thirdness”. One work by this man outlined the method of tenacity
and method of authority as ways of settling opinions, and also
outlined the (*) “guiding principle of inference”.  Another work by
this thinker, which was part of his series Illustrations of the Logic
of Science, discusses the example of adding accelerations together
using a parallelogram and contrasts distinct and confused conceptions.
For 10 points, name this author of “The Fixation of Belief” and “How
to Make Our Ideas Clear”, an early American pragmatist. Chinua Achebe
[or Albert Chinualumogu Achebe] In one essay, this author contrasted
Albert Schweitzer’s usage of the term “junior brother” with another
man’s refusal to go beyond “distant kinship.” That essay begins by
recounting how an adult was surprised to hear that a certain place had
literature or history. This author also wrote about a boy who converts
to Christianity and changes his name to Isaac, which earns him a
beating from his father; that novel also tells of a (*) tortoise that
grows wings and feasts with birds. This author of the essay collection
Hopes and Impediments wrote a novel in which the main character’s
mother begs him not to marry the osu Clara, so he gets Clara an
abortion when she gets pregnant. In this author’s most famous work, an
oracle declares that the villagers must kill Ikemefuna. For 10 points,
name this author of “An Image of Africa,” No Longer at Ease, and
Things Fall Apart. “The Market for Lemons: Quality Uncertainty and the
Market Mechanism” This work gives examples of its central principle by
examining India’s industrial managing agencies, as well as the high
rates charged by local moneylenders as opposed to the rates charged by
central banks; that section is followed by one on “Counteracting
Institutions.” This essay shows that, even with an initial positive
demand at prices up to 3/2 mu, eventually mu goes to zero. The author
declares that the “even exchange rate”  is what allows for a (*)
“modified reappearance” of Gresham’s Law in the situation proposed in
this paper, which suggests that, when quality is judged by a market
statistic, sellers are encouraged to be dishonest. For 10 points,
identify this paper on the consequences of information asymmetry by
George Akerlof, which discusses the trade of used cars. elimination
[accept E1 before mentioned; accept E2 before mentioned] In the
catalytic cycle of Wilkinson’s catalyst, the product is evolved after
a reductive form of this type of reaction. When performed in a
cyclohexane ring, one type of this reaction can be performed on a pair
of substituents in the axial position. One type of this reaction is
performed using potassium tert-butoxide and has a deuterium isotope
effect greater than one. One type of this reaction uses an initial
step of exhaustive methylation and generates (*) the less-substituted
product, though most types of this reaction generate the most
substituted product according to Zaitsev’s rule. Another type of this
reaction competes with SN1 and results from the deprotonation of a
carbocation, creating an alkene, while another requires an
antiperiplanar configuration. For 10  points, name this type of
reaction whose mechanisms include E1 and E2, in which a group is
kicked off a molecule. rain [accept precipitation] The size
distribution of the elements of this process is given by the Marshall-
Palmer law, and the Z-R  relation is used to correlate the severity of
this phenomenon with radar reflectivity. Along with temperature, the
amount of this phenomenon is used to distinguish groups A through E in
the Koppen (*) classification system. This phenomenon can be caused by
adiabatic cooling of anabatic wind to below its dew point. Mountains
create a “shadow” in which this phenomenon doesn’t occur, and this
phenomenon occurs quite heavily during a monsoon. For 10 points, name
this weather phenomenon in which water vapor condenses into liquid
droplets and falls on the ground. Messiah The premiere of this piece
in a theater prompted a critical letter from “Philalethes” to be
published in the  Universal Spectator. This piece’s first section is a
grave sinfonia that repeats a dotted quarter – eighth motif; that
section is followed by two recitatives for tenor. This piece is
separated into three parts, the second of which concludes with a
section that repeats, “for ever and ever.” The instrumental (*) Pifa
section begins the fourth of twelve “scenes” in this work. The text of
this work, which includes “Ev’ry valley shall be exalted,” was
collected by Charles Jennens from the Book of Common Prayer and the
King James Bible. For 10 points, name this oratorio by Handel, which
includes the “Hallelujah” chorus. bladder One condition of this organ
is characterized by Michaelis-Gutmann bodies and foamy histiocytes on
section; that condition is Malakoplakia. Markers of tumors of this
organ include NMP22 and factor H-related protein, and cancer of it is
caused by Schistosoma haematobium and arylamines. The compound
acrolein, a byproduct of cyclophosphamide, causes hemorrhage and
cancer in this organ. A Mitrofanoff procedure is used to bypass the
function of this organ in patients in which it becomes neurogenic. A
congenital defect involving exstrophy of this organ is commonly found
alongside (*) epispadias. This organ, whose lining has transitional
epithelium, contracts via the detrusor muscle. This organ is filled by
a pair of ureters, which originate from the kidney. For 10 points,
name this organ, found in the lower abdomen, that stores urine. Yazoo
Land Frauds [accept reasonable equivalents mentioning Yazoo] Outrage
over this scandal led to the election of Jared Irwin, and Senator
James Jackson resigned due to it. The legislation at the center of
this scandal was passed by George Mathews, and his successors used
glass prisms to burn copies of it. This scandal led to the creation of
a lottery system in which single men received one entry and veterans
and married men got two. Several companies at the center of this
scandal were offshoots of the Combined Society. This scandal, which
occurred at the same time as a similar incident in Pine Barrens, led
to a Supreme Court case that held a state can’t (*) void contracts
even if the contract was entered into via bribery; that case was
Fletcher v. Peck. This scandal occurred after state legislators were
offered discounted tracts. For 10 points, name this early US scandal
involving Georgia politicians buying land. The Marriage of Figaro, or
The Day of Madness [or Le nozze di Figaro, ossia la folle giornata] In
one scene of this opera, a man tells of how he found his page with a
girl under the kitchen table; while saying this, he lifts a dress from
a chair and finds his page. In a later scene, that page jumps out of a
window and breaks Antonio’s flowerpots. This opera begins with the
title character measuring space for a bed and singing “Cinque, dieci,
venti.” A lawyer in this work vows to exact revenge on a man who
caused him to lose his beloved in the aria, (*) “La Vendetta”; his
plan involves forcing the marriage of Marcellina on the title
character, despite his engagement to Susanna. This was the first of
its composer’s operas to have a libretto written by Lorenzo Da Ponte,
and this opera continues the story of Count Almaviva. For 10 points,
name this opera by Mozart based on a play by Beaumarchais. Battle of
Thermopylae [or the Hot Gates of Thermopylae; prompt on Hot Gates;
prompt on Malis] One feature at the site of this battle was discussed
in a 1980 paper by Paul W. Wallace; that paper discredited starting
locations for that feature here such as the Damasta Spur, the
Chalkomata Spring, and the Asopos Gorge. That feature at this battle
was determined to have started at Vardates and was abandoned by 1000
Phocians seeking to defend their homeland when they caught sight of
troops led by Hydarnes. That feature at this battle allowed the
victors to (*) outflank a nearby defending army that was entirely
withdrawn except for a rearguard that included 700 Thespians. At this
battle, Ephialtes, a traitorous resident of Trachis, revealed a hidden
goat path in the mountains to forces under a frustrated Xerxes II. For
10 points, name this battle which was fought at the same time as
Artemisium, where the namesake gates were the site of a last stand by
the Spartan King Leonidas. 17\. Some men in this play discuss a
woman’s “Wiesbaden” affair and her source of income while that woman
is hiding in the same room; her prospective husband responds to these
inquisitions with, “she’s explained that.” This play opens One feature
at the site of this battle was discussed in a 1980 paper by Paul W.
Wallace; that paper discredited starting locations for that feature
here such as the Damasta Spur, the Chalkomata Spring, and the Asopos
Gorge. That feature at this battle was determined to have started at
Vardates and was abandoned by 1000 Phocians seeking to defend their
homeland when they caught sight of troops led by Hydarnes. That
feature at this battle allowed the victors to (*) outflank a nearby
defending army that was entirely withdrawn except for a rearguard that
included 700 Thespians. At this battle, Ephialtes, a traitorous
resident of Trachis, revealed a hidden goat path in the mountains to
forces under a frustrated Xerxes II. For 10 points, name this battle
which was fought at the same time as Artemisium, where the namesake
gates were the site of a last stand by the Spartan King Leonidas. Adem
[or Adam] An angel supposedly rubbed this man’s head with a ruby until
his hair fell out. This man spent forty days on Mount Safah weeping,
after which Jibril taught him how to perform ritual ablution. This
figure was given the title Safiullah and was the first person given
the designation of prophet. Abu Hurira narrates a Hadith in Bukhari
543 stating that this figure was 60 cubits tall, and this man spent
957 years on (*) Earth and 43 years in heaven. Iblis refused to bow to
this figure, resulting in his banishment. This figure was born after
Allah stated  “Be” to a collection of clay and dust. For 10 points,
name this figure whose wife Hawwa was created from his rib and who was
expelled from paradise after Shaitan tempted them with the fruit of
the forbidden tree, the first man in Islam. Pelops One of this man’s
children restored the walls of Megara after killing the Cythaeronion
lion so that he could marry Euachme. This man won a contest against a
figure who had affixed the previous losers’ severed heads to the
columns of his palace. The constellation Auriga was created after this
man pushed another off of a cliff; that charioteer had previously
helped this man win a race against Oenomaus and was named (*)
Myrtilus. This man’s children included two brothers who agreed to
transfer a kingdom when the sun moved backwards in the sky, and threw
their half-brother Chrysippus into a well. This father of Thyestes and
Atreus and husband of Hippodamia received an ivory prosthetic after
Demeter accidentally ate his shoulder. For 10 points, name this son of
Tantalus who was cut up and served to the gods at a banquet, the
namesake of a Grecian peninsula. distance [accept things like “how far
away things are” or equivalents] This quantity is equal to 10 to the
power quantity apparent magnitude minus absolute magnitude plus 5, all
over 5, and the difference between the apparent and absolute magnitude
is often called the modulus of this quantity. Baryon acoustic
oscillations provide a standard for measuring this quantity. Two
versions of this quantity, one of which can change over time and the
other which is constant, are related by the (*) scale factor; those
are the co- moving and proper versions of it. Leavitt’s fixed period-
luminosity relationship for Cepheid variables allows their use for
measuring this quantity. Measures of this quantity are calibrated
using stellar parallax.  The radial velocity is equal to this value
times the Hubble parameter according to Hubble’s law, which is used to
relate it to redshift. For 10 points, name this parameter which is
measured in parsecs and light-years. Leon Trotsky One of this man’s
essays says that abusive language and swearing are legacies of
slavery; that is The  Struggle for Cultured Speech. George Breitman
edited a 14-volume collection of his works. This man attacked Karl
Kautsky in a work sometimes published as Democracy and Dictatorship.
This man called a particular ideology “Bonapartism” and criticized
that ideology’s “zigzags” in policy in one work. This man applied the
word “degenerated” to (*) states in which the bureaucracy has taken
over, a condition he called his country’s  “Thermidor”. In one work he
advocated creating a vanguard party to perpetuate the worldwide
“permanent revolution”, and he argued heavily against “socialism in
one country”. For 10 points, name this author of The Revolution
Betrayed who was purged and exiled to Mexico, where he was killed on
orders from his rival, Stalin. weak force One theory of this force
states that the square of its coupling constant times the square root
of 2 over 8 is proportional to G sub F. The constraint V sub ik times
V-star of jk, summed over all k, equals zero, gives the unitarity
triangles that constrain a mathematical device used to describe this
force. The particles that mediate this force were discovered using
stochastic cooling in the UA1 and UA2 collaborations, which collided
protons and antiprotons together; that experiment won (*) Rubbia and
van Der Meer the Nobel Prize.  The aforementioned matrix contains a
CP-violating phase and is named for Cabibo, Kobayashi, and Masakawa.
Glashow, Weinberg, and Salaam unified it with electromagnetism, and
this force mediates beta decay. For 10 points, name this force that is
mediated by the W and Z particles. Rosh Hashanah [prompt on “Jewish
New Year”] According to the Jewish calendar, this is the earlier of
two holidays on which the Unetannah Tokef piyyut is recited. In the
days leading up to this holiday, the akeidah, chatanu, and techinah
prayers are recited in the Ashkenazi tradition as their selichot
prayers. One of the customs on this holiday traces its origin to the
Sefer Maharil of Rabbi Molin and involves throwing bread into water to
represent the casting off of sins; that tradition is called (*)
tashlikh. The ba’al tekiyah performs one traditional rite on this
holiday, while another tradition is to eat apples dipped in honey on
this first of the Days of Awe, which involves 100 blows on the shofar.
For 10 points, name this Jewish holiday on the first two days of
Tishrei that recently marked the beginning of the 5,774th year. Bleak
House In this novel, after the protagonist’s maid brings her a man’s
marriage proposal by letter, she uses a candle to burn some dried
flowers she had received from another man before accepting the
proposal. A man once thought to be dead becomes of interest in this
novel when someone wants to inspect his handwriting; that character’s
letters are sought out by Guppy who finds out that he was using the
name (*) “Nemo.” The mistress of Chesney Wold fears that news of her
illegitimate child will be revealed, so she runs away and dies where
her lover, Captain Hawdon, was buried. The protagonist ends up
marrying Alan Woodcourt at the end of this novel that details Richard
Carstone’s obsession with the Chancery court case, Jarndyce v.
Jarndyce. For 10 points, name this Charles Dickens novel centering on
Esther Summerson who lives in the title location. Gian Lorenzo Bernini
This sculptor added an African man wrestling with an animal to the
center of a della Porta work, and he created a large shell with three
bees sitting at its base. Another one of this artist’s sculptures
contains the Barberini coat of arms and is supported by four open-
mouthed dolphins whose tail fins hold up a kneeling god who holds a
(*) conch to his mouth. One figure sits on a bunch of coins while
another holds an oar in a work by this artist that shows another man
struggling to uncover his head from beneath a cloth. The four title
characters surround an Egyptian obelisk in a sculpture by this man who
showed an angel ready to drive an arrow into a swooning female. For 10
points, name this sculptor of Triton and Fountain of the Four Rivers
as well as Ecstasy of Saint Teresa. Maxim Gorky [or Alexei Maximovich
Peshkov] This author wrote a play in which a man starts a fight over
another man having beaten his sister, but the fight is interrupted by
a character who gets on top of a stove and starts yawning; that
character had earlier declared that “all are equal” after another man
stated, “We’re all of us… nothing but the bare naked man.”  This
author created a character who fasts for eight days in prison after
being insulted in jail and participates in banned-book-reading
sessions in Pavel’s house that eventually lead to Pavel’s arrest,
which saddens (*) Pelegaya. This author wrote a play in which the
Actor hangs himself after spending some time in Vassilissa and
Kostilyoff’s house with a thief, a gambler, and Luka. This author of
The Mother used the socialist-realist style of literature in a work
about a poor house. For 10 points, name this Russian author of The
Lower Depths. Easter Rising [or Easter Rebellion; accept alternatives
for rebellion such as revolt, uprising, etc.; or  Eiri Amach na Casca]
Charles Blackader had to make decisions on several court-martials
after this event. During this event, the HMS Bluebell escorted Captain
Karl Spindler to port, where he scuttled his ship; that ship, the SMS
Libau, was masquerading as the Norwegian ship Aud. John Maxwell led
the victorious forces in this event.  The headquarters of instigators
of this event were located in the General Post (*) Office. Attempting
to secure German arms for the perpetrators of this event led to the
execution of Roger Casement. James Connolly and Patrick Pearse were
among the signatories of the Declaration of the Revolution that was
promulgated during this event. For 10 points, name this 1916 revolt
against British rule by the Irish Volunteers that was largely
concentrated in Dublin. John Singleton Copley One painting by this
artist includes a golden statue in the background that faces away from
the central event and includes a wounded drummer at the bottom left
and the black servant Pompey in the center. This artist also included
a tapestry of the defeat of the Spanish Armada behind a huge group of
aristocrats in white and red robes who look on while Pitt the Elder
collapses. The man in this artist’s (*)  Head of a Negro appears in
another work by him, and he painted his half brother holding a gold
chain on a table with his pet; that depiction of Henry Pelham is
titled Boy with Squirrel. This man set another work in Havana Harbor
where a boatswain drives a spear into the water to save a boy. For 10
points, name this painter of Watson and the Shark. People’s Republic
of China and the United States of America [or PRC and USA; or Zhonghua
Renmin Gongheguo and Mei Guo; or P.R. China and America; or any
combination of the above as long as both are included] One of these
countries issued the “Letter of the two sorries” to the other
following an aviation incident.  Relations between these two countries
were damaged when one country’s premier was refused a handshake by the
other’s secretary of state. Relations between these two countries
improved with the release of the Three Communiqués. During Operation
Allied Force, one of these countries accidentally bombed the other
country’s (*) embassy in Belgrade. Relations between these two
countries improved after an incident in which Glen Cowan received a
silk screen; that incident led Kissinger to feign sickness while on a
trip to Pakistan to secretly plan a 1972 trip. For 10 points, name
these two countries whose Ping- Pong diplomacy led to Nixon’s visit to
Mao. Hokkaido [or Ezo] This island’s Lake Akan is famous for its moss
balls. The country that controls this island claims that some nearby
islands such as Iturup and Kunashir fall under this island’s Nemuro
subprefecture. This island is the largest of its country’s 47
prefectures. This island was the site of the (*) 1972 Winter Olympics,
which was held in a city that is much larger than its second and third
largest cities; those other cities here are Asahikawa, which is in its
centre and Hakodate, which is in its south. The Strait of La Perouse
separates this island from Sakhalin Island in the north, and the
Seikan Tunnel traverses the Sugaru Strait, which separates this island
on which the Ainu live from Honshu in the south. For 10 points, name
this northernmost of the four main islands of Japan. the Fronde [or La
Fronde] This conflict included the Battle of Fauborg St. Antoine,
which resulted in the capitulation of a capital city. That capital
city had earlier been besieged by a man who was imprisoned with his
brother-in-law Henri d’Orléans a year after taking it. This conflict
was subsumed into a war that ended with the Peace of the Pyrenees and
it included the revolt of the Grand (*) Condé, who defected to Spain
and was later defeated at the Battle of the Dunes. The Peace of Rueil
ended the first phase of this conflict, which was led by the namesake
rebellious courts. This conflict was split into two phases, one “of
the Parlements” and one “of the Princes.” It occurred during the
regency of Anne of Austria, who dismissed and then recalled its
target, Cardinal Mazarin. For 10 points, name this civil war in France
during the minority of Louis XIV that takes its name from a sling.
kidney One tumor of this organ occurs often in patients with Denys-
Drash syndrome and is caused by deletion of the WT1 gene on chromosome
11p. Clear cell carcinoma of this organ is common in von Hippel-Lindau
syndrome. Mutations in cilia-localizing proteins causes a disease in
which this organ is filled with cysts. One section of this organ
requires podocin in order to form (*) slit pores, which lie opposite a
basement membrane from an array of podocytes. One section of this
organ inserts aquaporins into its membrane in response to ADH. One
section of this organ contains the NKCC1 cotransporter in its thick
limb and uses a countercurrent multiplier system to concentrate the
filtrate. For 10 points, name this organ whose functional unit
contains a group of capillaries called the glomerulus, the Bowman’s
capsule, and the loop of Henle as part of the nephron. Jerome David
Salinger In one story, this author wrote of a young girl who sleeps on
the edge of her bed to make room for her imaginary friend even after a
car ran over and killed that imaginary friend, Jimmy Jimmerino. In
another story, a sergeant discovers an old package that contains a
letter ending with several all caps “HELLO”s as well as a “lucky
talisman,” a wristwatch with broken crystal. In another story, a young
girl becomes jealous of (*) Sharon Lipschutz who sat with an older man
while he played the piano in a hotel lounge; that girl, Sybil
Carpenter, learns how a certain animal dies when it gets too fat to
escape its feeding hole. This author included  “Uncle Wiggily in
Connecticut” and “For Esme – with Love and Squalor” in his Nine
Stories. For 10 points, name this creator of Seymour Glass in his “A
Perfect Day for Bananafish.” Shostakovich’s Symphony No. 7 in C major,
Op. 60 [or Leningrad Symphony; accept Symphony No. 7  in C major, Op.
60 after “Shostakovich” is read] The right to conduct this work’s
American premiere was lost by Artur Rodzinski and Leopold Stokowski to
the NBC Symphony Orchestra under Toscanini who broadcast the premiere
on radio. The title “Memories” was removed from this work’s second
movement, which the composer called a “lyrical intermezzo,” but is
usually classified as a scherzo. This work earned comparisons to
Bolero for the (*) twelve variations, all rising in volume, on the
first movement’s theme that used a melody from Lehar’s The Merry Widow
as well as a previously lambasted opera by the same composer. This
symphony also contains a very long snare drum part in the first
movement for its “invasion theme.” For 10 points, name this symphonic
testament to Soviet victims in World War II that was composed by
Shostakovich. Horace [or Quintus Horatius Flaccus] This poet wrote,
“neither, Torquatus, your race, nor your eloquence, nor your piety
will restore you,”  in a poem ending, “nor is Theseus powerful enough
to break the chains for dear Pirithous.” This author described, “my
childhood… beyond the bounds of nurturing Apulia,” while another poem
from the same collection says to “place in the hours that come as
little faith as you can;” that collection begins with a dedication to
Maecenas and consists of (*) four books. This author of the Carmen
Saeculare wrote, “as is painting, so is poetry,” and wrote two books
each of Epistles and Satires. This author coined the phrase, “in
medias res,”  while one of his collections used a form earlier
developed by Pindar and includes the phrase, “Carpe diem.” For 10
points name this Roman poet of Ars Poetica and his collection of Odes.
Circe [or Kirke] In Hesiod’s Theogony, this figure is the mother of
Latinus. In the Apollonius of Rhodes’s Argonautica,  this figure
comforts her niece Medea. In Ovid’s Metamorphoses, this figure is
defeated by Eurylochus. Some of this figure’s jealous fits resulted in
the a King of Latium being turned into a bird and the love interest of
Glaucus being turned into a monster. In one story, after this figure’s
son kills her former lover, she marries that former lover’s son; that
work is the (*) Telegony. This figure tells one hero how to travel to
the underworld and to speak with Tiresias about how to overturn one of
Poseidon’s curses. Hermes travelled to Aiaia to deliver moly to a hero
who would proceed to sleep with this figure for a year. For 10 points,
name this enchantress who turns Odysseus’s men into pigs. Ghent
Altarpiece [or Adoration of the Mystic Lamb] Like a scene by Campin,
the Deesis of this work is unusual in that it shows the Virgin Mary
reading a book. Saint Cecilia is depicted playing the organ next to a
naked Eve holding the citrus fruit in this work.  This work’s back
shows a crown-wearing Mary with a haloed dove directly above her in an
Annunciation scene. This work includes another image of the dove of
the Holy Spirit surrounded by white and gold circles of light at the
top of a scene that also includes an image of the (*) fountain of life
below a pedestal surrounded by fourteen angels in a circle; that
pedestal holds a golden chalice, into which blood falls from the chest
of the sacrificial Lamb of God. For 10 points, name this huge work of
art designed by Hubert and painted by his brother, Jan van Eyck.
Anderson [or Maxwell Anderson, or Sherwood Anderson] One author with
this last name wrote about a man who jeopardizes his relationship with
Marjorie Gray by working with his assistant, Bus, to fatten a bill to
the point where it would certainly be vetoed by the president. Another
author with this last name wrote a story in which a man takes his son
into the woods where he will burn a lamb, but when he pulls out a
knife his son, David, gets scared and runs away. An author with this
last name created Alan McLean in (*)  Both Your Houses, while another
author with this last name wrote “Terror” as part of “Godliness,” one
of the many stories in a collection that describes a man who seduces
Louise Trunnion and Helen White and is named George Willard. For 10
points, name this last name of the author of Winesburg, Ohio. hydrogen
bonding Fabiola and Chapman added a pair of angles to a potential
modelling these phenomena, which are often modelled by the Dreiding
equation. These phenomena are modelled by a 12-10 potential. Thiourea
catalysis makes extensive use of these phenomena, and these phenomena
are responsible for the dimerization of carboxylic acids. These
phenomena occur between residue n and n plus four in a standard (*)
alpha helix.  These phenomena commonly cause gross deviations from
Raoult’s law by inducing azeotropy, and these phenomena are
responsible for the high boiling point and remarkable solvent
properties of water. For 10 points, name this type of weak
intermolecular interaction between a heteroatom and an atom of the
namesake very light element. Ganga [accept the Ganges] This figure
once destroyed the fields of Jahnu, leading Jahnu to swallow this
figure and eventually release her from his ears. One of this figure’s
epithets reflects the fact that she can traverse all three worlds.
This figure descended to earth after the sage Kapila burned the sixty
thousand children of Sagara to death, and she helped them ascend to
heaven. In one story, this figure killed seven of her children until
her husband questioned her actions with the eighth; that eighth child
was Bhishima, who was the son of (*) Shantanu.  During her descent to
earth, she landed on Shiva’s hair, which he knotted in order to trap
her and attenuate the flow of her water to the earth. For 10 points,
name this personification of a sacred river in Hindu mythology.
Christian Democratic Union of Germany [or CDU; or Christlich
Demokratische Union  Deutschlands] One leader from this party ran with
an election poster that stated “No Experiments!” and survived a
bombing attempt by Eliezer Sudit, a member of the Irgun. In 1999,
several members of this party were accused of accepting illegal
donations from arms dealer Karlheinz Schreiber. The first leader of
this party negotiated the “Return of the 10,000”, while a later leader
negotiated the two plus four treaty, which lead to the stepping down
and (*) arrest of Egon Krenz. One member of this party presided over
the implementation of a  “social market economy”, which led to a
period of low inflation and rapid growth called the “economic
miracle”; that figure was Ludwig Erhard, who served as finance
minister under the first Chancellor from this party, Konrad Adenauer.
For 10 points, name this German political party whose members include
Helmut Kohl and the current chancellor, Angela Merkel. Charlie Chaplin
In one film directed by this man, a plan to select a martyr by putting
a coin in a pudding is foiled by the cook putting a coin in every
pudding. In one film directed by him, the protagonist plays with the
toys in a department store after getting a job as a night watchman. In
another film, this man’s character accidentally puts English mustard
on his strawberries during a negotiation. In that film, this man’s
character dances with a large (*) inflatable globe, and looks
identical to an amnesiac Jewish barber. This man plays a factory
worker who is trapped in the gears of a giant machine before being
sent to jail in another work. This man, who often appeared opposite
Paulette Goddard, played Adenoid Hynkel in The Great Dictator. For 10
points, name this early 20th century actor and director whose films
like Modern Times and City Lights featured his “Little Tramp” persona.
Robert Herrick One work by this author pleads, “Stay, stay, Until the
hasting day Has run But to the evensong;” that poem later says, “We
die, As your hours do, and dry Away, Like to the summer’s rain” and is
about flowers “we weep to see” and that “haste away so soon.” This
author of “To Daffodils” wrote of a state that “Do more bewitch me
than when art Is too (*) precise in every part.” This author created a
speaker who sees “how sweetly flows That liquefaction of her clothes”
in one poem also wrote of “The glorious lamp of heaven, the sun” and
how  “The higher he’s a-getting, The sooner will his race be run.”
This poet wrote Noble Numbers and the poem “Delight in Disorder” as
well as a collection including many poems addressed to Julia. For 10
points, name this author of Hesperides who wrote “Gather ye rosebuds
while ye may” in his “To the Virgins, to Make Much of Time.” Lenski’s
longterm E. coli evolution experiment [accept anything mentioning the
long term evolution of E. Coli] The creator of this experiment posited
a form of adaptive gene loss in the Black Queen Hypothesis. In one
instance, this experiment showed the contingency of pykF and nadR
polymorphisms. By using a gene duplication of the CitT gene under the
control of an mk promoter, several subjects of this experiment gained
the ability to metabolize (*) citrate. The setup of this experiment
contains half Ara plus and half Ara minus strains and relies on daily
1:100 serial dilution in DM25 medium. The subjects of this experiment
are contained in twelve flasks and have undergone over fifty thousand
generations of reproduction. For 10 points, name this experiment in
which a common laboratory strain of bacteria has been subjected to 20
years of evolution. Friedrich Nietzsche This man’s reputation as a
philosopher was rehabilitated by Gilles Deleuze, who wrote a book
titled  “[This man and philosophy.” In one work, this thinker asserted
“the great wars of the present age are the effects of the study of
history.” That work ends by comparing like-minded philosophers to
Argonauts of the Mind and spends numerous pages attacking Christian
exegesis. This author collected his “thoughts on the prejudices of (*)
morality” into his book Daybreak.  Another of his books has chapter
headings like “Why I am a Fatality” and “Why I Write Such Good Books”
and was published in 1888, the year he went hopelessly insane. For 10
points, name this author of the autobiographical Ecce Homo, a
philosopher who asserted that “God is Dead”. quaternion These entities
can be used in a form of interpolation called slerping. Every finite
p-group that has every abelian subgroup cyclic is either itself cyclic
or is a generalized group of these entities, and the dicyclic group of
order two is isomorphic to the group of them. The factor group of the
group of these entities with their center is isomorphic to the Klein
four-group. Those with norm one are called versors, and these entities
follow the complex numbers in the (*) Cayley-Dickson construction.
Symbolized by a blackboard H, they are often used to implement three-
dimensional rotations. They consist of three elements, i, j, and k,
whose square is negative one and whose products with each other are
anticommutative. For 10 points, name this four-dimensional number
system created by Hamilton. Gideon [or Jerub-Baal] This man was told
to only keep in his army those that lapped water with their tongues
like a dog. The son of this man was criticized in a story about trees
trying to anoint a thorn bush; that son of this leader was later
killed when a woman in Thebez threw a millstone on his head. Using
earrings taken from plunder, he created an ephod that the people
worshipped. This man was the father of the villainous dictator (*)
Abimelech. He first attracted attention by destroying his father’s
altar to Baal. In order to be assured of God’s promises, this person
“put out a fleece” and asked God to keep the dew only on it, not the
ground. This man’s forces used trumpets in their victory over the
Midianites. For 10 points, name this Biblical Judge, who lends his
name to an organization that provides Bibles. “Deep Play: Notes on the
Balinese Cockfight” [prompt on “Interpretation of Cultures”; do not
prompt on “Notes on the Balinese Cockfight”] This work describes one
event as a “Platonic concept of hate”. One section of this work notes
that for this works subjects, incest is far more palatable than
bestiality, and states that clumsiness is frowned upon because it
makes people appear beast-like. The author notes that he and his wife
were initially “invisible”  until they ran from a police raid, and
also explicates the double meaning of the word “sabung”. The events
described in this work are divided into (*) 21 second periods, and are
divided into ones with high stakes and large wagers and those without.
The participants in the title event have razors tied to their legs
before being set against each other. For 10 points, name this essay,
an example of “thick description” that analyzes the role of the title
illegal sporting events, by Clifford Geertz. Jun’ichiro Tanizaki This
author wrote a work in which a young boy is gifted a dog named
“Lindy,” which is short for  “Lindbergh,” which is said to be “A high-
grade imported name;” later in that novel, a woman starts sobbing at
night like she used to when she first got married and reveals her
affair with Aso. Another of this author’s novels ends with a girl
getting diarrhea from seeing her wedding attire because she is so
disgusted by the bastard son (*) Sachiko found for her to marry. One
of this author’s novels involves the safeguarding of Hiroshi from the
impending divorce of his parents Misako and Kaname, while another
involves a secret birth given by Taeko and the search for a suitor for
Yukiko. For 10 points, name this author of Some Prefer Nettles and The
Makioka Sisters. Firebombing of Tokyo [or Operation Meatinghouse
before mention; or Great Tokyo air raid; prompt on “firebombing of
Japan” and equivalents] St. Clair McKelway, who did public relations
for this event’s planner, called the perpetrators of this event  “the
thousand kids.” This March 9-10 event was codenamed Operation
Meatinghouse and it proved the value of a series of tactical
innovations such as (*) flying at low elevations at night in order to
avoid clouds and destroy the cottage industries located in wooden
homes. This event that led to more than 100 000 deaths was the
deadliest conventional air raid in history. It was the first in a
campaign planned by Curtis Lemay that later targeted Nagoya, Osaka and
Kobe. About a dozen of the 334 B-29s at this event were downed because
of columns of heat. For 10  points, name this 1945 US Army Air Force
air raid that led to a firestorm consuming much of the Japanese
capital. Sir Edward William Elgar, 1st Baronet The nobilmente e
semplice first movement of one work by this composer has a long
thematic introduction in A flat, but then shifts to D minor; that is
this composer’s Symphony No. 1, one of very few symphonies in A flat
major. This composer who often composed at the Brinkwells country
house wrote a Serenade for Strings  in E minor. This composer wrote a
long choral work based on text by (*) John Henry Newman, and another
of his works uses the song “Land of Hope and Glory” for its trio
section; that work is the first in a set of five marches by this
composer who wrote sections like “Dorabella” and “Nimrod” for another
work. For 10 points, name this composer of the Enigma Variations and
the marches in Pomp and Circumstance. Oliver Cromwell He created a
system of military rule by major generals, and his French alliance
ended up giving his country Dunkirk. This ruler, whose death was
called for in the pamphlet “Killing no Murder”, was given his highest
position by a document drafted by James Lambert and based partly on
the “Heads of Proposals”.  This leader passed the Penal Laws during a
campaign in which he gave no quarter to the defeated garrison of (*)
Drogheda; that campaign was his invasion of Ireland. He carried out a
purge of the Rump Parliament to create the Barebones Parliament. This
leader was disinterred and posthumously beheaded for his part in a war
during which he served under Lord Fairfax. His son was so incompetent
that Parliament voted to restore Charles II. For 10  points, name this
Puritan general of the New Model Army and Lord Protector of the
Commonwealth of England. index of refraction [or refractive index,
accept n before mention] This value appears in both terms of the
definition of the Lagrange invariant. Whether this value is in the
numerator or the denominator of the expression for momentum is the
focus of the Abraham-Minkowski controversy. The square of this value
minus one all over the square of this value plus two is equal to four
pi over three times number of molecules per unit volume times
polarizability. The square of this value is equal to one plus a series
of terms with B times lambda squared over lambda squared minus C
according to the (*) Sellmeier equation. The difference between its
ordinary and extraordinary versions gives birefringence. This value is
on both sides of a law which relates the angle of incidence to another
angle; that law is named for Snell. For 10  points, name this value
symbolized n that is used to measure how much light bends when it
moves between media. 19\. In 2012, this country’s military carried out
Operation Sledgehammer to seize Kismayu. The Lotikipi Basin and Lodwar
Basin aquifers were two of the This value appears in both terms of the
definition of the Lagrange invariant. Whether this value is in the
numerator or the denominator of the expression for momentum is the
focus of the Abraham-Minkowski controversy. The square of this value
minus one all over the square of this value plus two is equal to four
pi over three times number of molecules per unit volume times
polarizability. The square of this value is equal to one plus a series
of terms with B times lambda squared over lambda squared minus C
according to the (*) Sellmeier equation. The difference between its
ordinary and extraordinary versions gives birefringence. This value is
on both sides of a law which relates the angle of incidence to another
angle; that law is named for Snell. For 10  points, name this value
symbolized n that is used to measure how much light bends when it
moves between media. Dido and Aeneas After a recitative in this opera,
a solo chromatically descending line starting on G in the bass
establishes G  minor as the key for one aria. The “Triumphing Dance”
ends the first act, which is followed by a “Prelude for the Witches”
to begin the second act that takes place in a cave where an elf is
told to disguise himself as (*) Mercury; that disguised character
convinces a man to leave with a group of sailors, which inspires a
woman to kill herself. The aria “Ah! Belinda” appears in this opera,
as does another with the lyrics, “remember me, but ah! forget my
fate.” This opera includes a famous example of ground bass and has a
libretto by Nahum Tate. For 10 points, name this opera that includes
“When I am laid in earth,” the first title character’s “Lament,” which
was written by Henry Purcell. Emma During a game at the protagonist’s
home in this novel, one character makes the word “blunder” and then
“Dixon,” the latter of which angers a woman and seems to confirm
suspicions of that woman’s affair with Mr.  Dixon. In this novel, a
party delays a trip to Box Hill to wait for a horse’s recovery, but in
the meantime they go to Donwell Abbey where a female rejects an
opportunity to become a governess. The protagonist of this novel
insults her talkative aunt,  (*) Miss Bates, and sabotages a potential
relationship involving Robert Martin by suggesting that Harriet reject
him. At the end of this novel, it is revealed that Frank Churchill has
been secretly engaged to Jane Fairfax. For 10 points, name this novel
that ends with the marriage of Mr. Knightley and the title matchmaker
written by Jane Austen. Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonous
Its first section uses the example of light refracting in a prism and
the yellow body of a jaundiced victim to argue that no human has a
true color. It uses the example of a man looking at a picture of
Julius Caesar to conclude that archetypes can only be inferred by some
mental faculty. The second section defines an occasion as an inactive
unthinking being and rejects the possibility that the views of
Malebranche are correct. The conceivability of certain items are
rejected when this work puts forth the (*) master argument. Using its
first title character as a philosophical opponent representing John
Locke, this work ultimately favors idealism over materialism, and it
is an update of the author’s A Treatise on the Principles of Human
Knowledge.  For 10 points, name this book by George Berkeley. ferns
[or pteridophyta] This group is susceptible to infection by Chirosia
betuleti, which causes Knotting gall. The family salviniaceae contains
small, free-floating examples of this division of organisms, which had
a huge radiation in the late Cretaceous period. The indusium is a
scaly covering for the sorii of these organisms. This division is
characterized by a small (*) heart-shaped gametophyte stage called the
prothallus. This group, which includes marattoids, psilotales,
leptosporangiates, and horsetails, are more evolved than lycophytes
due to having megaphylls on their true leaves. These organisms are
among the first evolutionarily to have xylem and phloem. For 10
points, name these seedless vascular plants, whose leaves are called
fronds. New Zealand [or Aotearoa] One protectionist economic program
in this country called “Think Big” prompted two economic
liberalization programs by successive governments called Ruthanasia
and Rogernomics. This country’s Fourth National Government held a 1993
constitutional referendum that adopted a Mixed Member Proportional
electoral system, making it the first (*) Commonwealth country to do
so. One opposition leader in this country said a certain policy would
be “gone by lunchtime” if he became prime minister; that policy was
this country becoming a nuclear-free zone during the Fourth Labour
Government of David Lange. The French DGSE  blew up a Greenpeace ship
in this country. For 10 points, name this Pacific island nation that
was the site of the bombing of the Rainbow Warrior in the harbour of
Auckland. giving to charity [or alms-giving] In Hinduism, this
practice is used to enable religious services called Karmkand and is
known as Bhiksha.  In Sikhism, this practice was established based on
the doctrine of Vand Chhako and is called the Dasvand.  The Hebrew
word for this practice translates as “righteousness”, and Maimonides
outlined eight levels of it in the (*) Hilkhot matanot aniyim of the
Mishan Torah. In Islam, the nisab establishes who is eligible for this
practice, and saddakah is an optional form of this practice. The fact
that non-Muslims are exempt from it is the basis of the Jizya. For 10
points, name this practice, which is called Zakat in Islam and in
Christianity is accomplished by passing around a collection plate.
Death and the King’s Horseman At the end of this play, a woman takes
the Bride offstage while telling her to “Turn your mind only to the
unborn” after closing a dead man’s eyes. This play includes a scene in
which a policeman is shocked to see his boss and his wife dancing,
which causes him to break a flowerpot; that scene follows one in a
market where a woman agrees to let another man sleep with her son’s
soon-to-be wife, which results in that girl getting (*) pregnant. At
the beginning of this play, the title character sings of the “Not-I
bird” during a conversation with the Praise-Singer in Iyaloja’s
district. When another character, who had just finished schooling in
Europe, finds his father bound by Jane’s husband, he kills himself;
that character is Olunde. For 10 points, name this play in which Simon
Pilkings interrupts Elesin’s ritual that was written by Wole Soyinka.
Byzantine emperors [or Eastern Roman Emperor before “Eastern” is read;
prompt on “Roman Emperor”; prompt on “Greek Emperor”; prompt on stuff
like “imperator”] One ruler with this title married Bertha of
Sulzbach, which led to an alliance with her brother-in-law, Conrad III
of Germany. One ruler with this title gained the submission of Raynald
of Chatillon after that ruler retook Cyprus. One work about a ruler
with this title claimed that his policies had led to the death of the
implausible number of (*) “ten thousand times ten thousand times ten
thousand”; that work was Procopius’s Secret History.  The last ruler
to hold this title is said to have exchanged his ceremonial clothing
for armor and died fighting invaders in 1453; that ruler was
Constantine XI. For 10 points, name this title held by men such as
Manuel I of the Komnenos Dynasty and Justinian the Great, both of whom
who ruled the Eastern Roman Empire. Lev Davidovich Landau This man
names the quantum equivalent of the Lorenz gauge, in which the gauge-
breaking parameter tends to zero, and he derived the expression for
the diamagnetism of a free-electron gas. The quantized cyclotron
orbits of a charged particle in a magnetic field are named for him.
After his death Pitaevskii replaced him as an author of the 10-volume
Course In Theoretical Physics. Another theory named for him sets the
free energy as a Taylor expansion of the (*) order parameter, and
describes second-order phase transitions.  Gilbert modified one
equation named for him to describe the precession of magnetization,
and this man won a Nobel prize for a theory that described the
superfluidity of Helium II. For 10 points, name this man who names a
formula for the time evolution of magnetization of a solid with
Lifshitz and a phenomenological theory of superfluidity with Ginzburg.
Helios One of this god’s daughters married the personification of the
Hydaspes River and was named Astris, and this god was the father of
Bisalte, a son of Gaia. Among this god’s daughters are one that
carries a copper staff allowing her to control a group of animals.
After this deity, the father of Phaethusa and Lampetia, was shot with
an arrow, he loaned his (*) golden cup to Heracles. Odysseus’ men
stole the cattle belonging to this deity, and one group of this
deity’s daughters turned into weeping poplar trees after their brother
fell into the Eriadnos river. After swearing an oath on the River
Styx, this man was forced to allow a son of Clymene to use his
chariot, with predictably negative consequences; that son was
Phaethon. For 10 points, name this sun god of Greek mythology. A
Prayer for Owen Meany At a wedding in this novel, a woman tries to
skip the long line for the bathroom by handing her panties to the
protagonist and peeing in bushes. When the main character of this work
gets bullied, his coins and baseball cards fall out of his pockets,
and the teacher Mrs. Walker blames him for the mess. The protagonist
of this work has a nasally voice that is represented with all caps. At
an airport, the protagonist of this novel uses his technique of “the
(*) shot” to save a group of Vietnamese orphans in the bathroom by
pushing a grenade into a window. The main character, who loves the
rock star Hester the Molester, finally gets to swing in little league,
but he hits a foul ball that kills Tabitha. The narrator, John
Wheelwright, describes how the tiny main character of this work is the
reason he believes in god. For 10 points, name this novel about a
religious boy by John Irving. Chamberlain [or Houston Stewart
Chamberlain, Joseph Chamberlain, Austen Chamberlain, and Neville
Chamberlain] One person with this surname wrote the racist work
Foundations of the Nineteenth Century. Another person with this
surname proposed the “Unauthorized Programme”, split his party with
Lord Devonshire to found the Liberal Unionists, and was the Secretary
of State for the Colonies during the Boer War. Another person with
surname shared the 1925 (*) Nobel Peace Prize with Charles Dawes for
his work on the Locarno Treaties. That politician, Austen, was the
half-brother of a prime minister who declared “peace for our time”
when returning from the Munich Conference. For 10 points, name this
surname of Neville, a British prime minister who appeased Hitler and
was succeeded by Winston Churchill. English Channel [or La Manche] One
island in this body of water was commonly described as Europe’s last
feudal state until a 2008  referendum. The deepest point in this body
of water is Hurd’s Deep. The world’s first large-scale tidal plant was
built on the estuary of the Rance River, which flows into this here.
The Solent is a smaller, parallel body of water north of this one. The
Cotentin Peninsula juts into this body of water which contains islands
such as Sark, Guernsey, (*) Jersey, and the Isle of Wight. This is the
largest body of water crossed by the Eurostar train.  Ports on this
body of water include Cherbourg, Le Havre, Portsmouth, and
Southampton. The narrowest point in this body of water is between Pas
de Calais and the white cliffs of Dover. For 10 points, name this body
of water that lies between France and the United Kingdom. Nicolas
Poussin This artist drew a god-figure flying near some clouds while
Eve draws Adam’s attention to the fruit in a tree in a painting of
“The Earthly Paradise” in a series including “The Spies with the
Grapes of the Promised Land;” that series is The Four Seasons. A man
raises his red cloak with his left hand from atop a pedestal on the
left of a painting by this artist who depicted a cherub blowing
bubbles at the bottom left of a painting that also includes (*) Aurora
leading Apollo’s chariot in the sky near the ring of the zodiac; that
painting features a winged old man on the right playing a lyre. This
artist showed a woman in gold and blue placing her hand on the back of
one of three shepherds at a tomb inscribed with the title phrase. For
10 points, name this painter of A Dance to the Music of Time and Et in
Arcadia ego. linear programming [prompt on partial answers] Problems
that can be solved by this field can be produced from more general
problems by the Charnes-Cooper transformation. One popular algorithm
in this field can cycle when not choosing the lowest-indexed pivot
according to Bland’s rule. The degenerate cube suggested by Klee and
Minty showed the exponential running time of some algorithms in this
field like the criss-cross algorithm. One algorithm in this field
creates a (*) polytope representing a feasible region before
traversing the edges of that polytope. Problems can be converted using
non-negative slack variables in order to use Dantzig’s simplex method
in this field. Methods in this field maximize an objective function
according to some constraints. For 10 points, name this technique to
solve optimization problems of the namesake form. The End of History
and the Last Man One chapter of this work opens with a quote about
eating pineapples on the moon to illustrate the weakness of strong
states. One chapter of this book states Asian economies have grown
faster than Latin American ones because of less state intervention,
and is entitled “The Victory of the VCR”. Another part of this work
draws upon Plato’s idea of the thymos to state that humans are
motivated by both economic self-interest and by self-esteem. A key
idea of this work is that industrialization and high technology cannot
exist alongside (*) despotic governments, meaning that modern
dictatorships are just a momentary downturn in the overall inexorable
arc of history. This work draws on Kojeve to state that the rise of
democracy worldwide signals the final endpoint of humanity’s
evolution. For 10 points, name this political work by Francis
Fukuyama. isotopes [accept more specific answers like isotopes of
hydrogen] Methane is used as a scavenger for fluorine atoms in a type
of Molecular Laser Separation named for these entities. These things
are used to label amino acids in the SILAC procedure. One method of
separating them relies on the Szilard-Chalmers effect. The GBEIF
equation describes the partial separation of these items kinetically
in nonequilibrium systems. Proxies of climate are based on the
equilibrium fractionation of these things. Their incorporation into a
part of a molecule whose bond is broken during a particular reaction
causes a slowdown in (*) reaction rate known as their namesake kinetic
effect. Their relative abundance is used to plot an isochron in a form
of dating that relies on the transformation of stable ones to unstable
ones. For 10 points, name these entities which differ by number of
neutrons, nuclei with the same atomic number but different atomic
mass. JFK’s inaugural address [prompt on “1961 inaugural address”
before “1961” is read] One section of this speech states that only a
few generations have been called upon to defend freedom in its time of
“maximum danger”. This work cites Isaiah’s call to lift the heavy
burdens off the oppressed. This speech calls for creating a “beachhead
of cooperation” to push back the “jungle of suspicion”, and warns that
what it suggests will not be done in 100 days, nor in 1000 days. John
Kenneth Galbraith suggested the line beginning (*) “let us never
negotiate out of fear”, and this speech was largely written by Ted
Sorenson. This speech was given at the same occasion that the poem The
Gift Outright was recited by Robert Frost. For 10 points, name this
speech which orders “ask not what your country can do for you – ask
what you can do for your country”, delivered in 1961 after the speaker
took the oath of office. drag [prompt on “friction”] A term for this
force is added to a term for inertial force in the Morison equation.
The Sears-Haack body experiences a minimum of one form of this
phenomenon, and in an oscillatory medium the ratio of these forces
over inertia is encoded by the Keulegen-Carpenter number. This is
equal to six pi times dynamic viscosity times radius times velocity
for a small spherical object in a homogenous, (*) laminar flow
according to Stokes’ law. Another law states that this quantity is
equal to one-half times mass density times v squared times cross-
sectional area times a namesake coefficient; that law is often used to
calculate the terminal velocity of a falling object. This force is the
sum of skin friction and form effects, and is minimized for
streamlined bodies. For 10  points, name this force that opposes
thrust by pulling backwards on a flying object. Franz Kafka This
author wrote about a group of men who bring out a dead camel and whip
the animals that eat it after another character is given rusty
scissors to fulfill the prophecy of ending the quarrel that divides
the world in two. In another story by this author, the title character
almost instantly travels a huge distance after a groom presents a team
of horses and kisses the maid, (*) Rosa. A girl’s parents marvel at
her development and consider finding her a husband after taking a tram
to the countryside and deciding to move into a smaller apartment in a
story by this man who wrote of the Traveler avoiding the Condemned Man
as he runs away from the Commandant’s harrow, and he wrote about a man
who gets injured by a thrown apple and dies in his bedroom after
turning into a horrible vermin. For 10 points, name this author of “In
the Penal Colony” and The Metamorphosis. Daniel Burnham This man’s
company designed the Pearson Hall of Science for Beloit College, and
Edler and Quayle designed the facades for this man’s Terminal Arcade
building in Terre Haute. William Howard Taft hired this man to
redesign the city of Manila. This man had a long partnership with John
Wellborn Root, with whom he designed a Masonic Temple Building. This
man drew upon the (*) City Beautiful movement as head designer of the
“White City” model for the 1893 World Columbian Exposition. One
building designed by this architect and Frederick DINKELBERG was
originally named for George Fuller, and stands between Fifth Avenue,
Broadway, and East 22nd street in NYC. For 10 points, name this
architect, who designed the triangular Flatiron Building. Mozi This
man’s sayings were compiled into the Ten Triads, which are each titled
after aired doctrines like  “Thrift in Utilization” and “Thrift in
Funerals”. This philosopher advocated uniting all moral standards into
a single objective standard in order to create harmony; that objective
standard is called a model. This man’s students used his method of
judging the world through cause, function, and historical basis to
found the (*) School of Names. This man developed an early form of
consequentialism that emphasized the stability of the state over
individual happiness, and this man’s work was corrected and compiled
by Sun Yirang. This man’s philosophy was suppressed during the Qin
dynasty and eventually superseded by Confucianism. For 10 points, name
this Chinese philosopher during the Warring States Period who preached
a doctrine of universal love. Also sprach Zarathustra [or Thus Spake
Zarathustra; or Thus Spoke Zarathustra] A 3/4-time section of this
work begins with clarinets and flutes alternately playing groups of
sixteenth notes over another theme that alternates between the trumpet
and violin parts; that section features a prominent violin solo. The
opening theme of this work is heard in alternate measures in the low
voices while the winds play B major chords at the ending of the final
section. This piece includes a 12/8 rhythm of forte notes for the
timpani to separate three repetitions of a (*) fanfare. This work
includes sections like “Dance Song” and ends with the “Song of the
Night Wanderer,” and its opening theme is played by the trumpets on
the notes C, G, C, and is called the “Sunrise” theme. For 10 points,
name this work by Richard Strauss who found inspiration in a text by
Nietzsche. Man and Superman At the end of one section of this play, a
woman asks “Tell me where can I find” the title character, to which
another character responds, “He is not yet created;” that section is
interrupted by a voice slowly becoming intelligible crying,
“Automobile, Automobile.” A woman in this play announces her pregnancy
and impending marriage but only at the end does she reveal her partner
to be the wealthy (*) Hector Malone. A famous sequence in this play
occurs after the chauffeur Enry Straker and his employer are
imprisoned by the League of the Sierra under Mendoza; that third act
features Roebuck Ramsden as a Statue and Mendoza as the Devil and is
sometimes performed on its own as “Don Juan in Hell.” For 10 points,
name this play about the pursuit by Ann Whitefield of John Tanner
written by George Bernard Shaw. cliometrics [or new economic history,
prompt on partial answers, prompt on “history” or quantitative
“history” or economic “history” or “historical economics”] One major
publication in this field distinguishes between formal and informal
constraints and shows how informal constraints have a large influence.
McCloskey and Williamson founded a “society” devoted to this
discipline. Conrad and Meyer published a manifesto for methods to be
used in this field, and its name was coined by Stanley Reiter.
Sokoloff and Engermann published an article in this field stating that
institutional structures are less important than the (*) distribution
of factors. A famous work in this field stated that large plantations
had the highest total factor productivity and argued that slavery was
economically beneficial for blacks.  For 10 points, identify this
discipline whose proponents include Nobelist Douglass C. North and the
author of Time on the Cross, Robert Fogel, the application of
quantitative methods to economic history, named for the Muse of
history. French Resistance [or La Résistance française; do not prompt
on “Free French”] One failed group in this movement was called
PHYSICIAN. Many units in this movement were set up by the BCRA.
Instructions for this movement included lines such as “the long sobs
of autumn violins” and  “wounds my heart with monotonous languor.” The
units in this movement eventually came to fall under the authority of
the CNR and opposed the efforts of the (*) milice. One code sent to
these people was the first lines of Paul Verlaine’s “Song of August”
which was done through a BBC radio program. This movement was aided by
the British Special Operations Executive and did a lot of sabotage
operations before the landings in Normandy.  For 10 points, name this
movement that resisted the German occupation of a country ruled by the
puppet regime in Vichy. Edgar Allen Poe One poem by this author tells
of “That motley drama-oh, be sure It shall not be forgot!” and goes on
to say, “Out-out are the lights-out all! And, over each quivering
form, The curtain, a funeral pall, Comes down;” that work by this
author states, “That the play is the tragedy, “Man.” And its hero,” is
the title figure.  This author described “thy hyacinth hair, thy
classic face, Thy naiad airs” as “the glory that was (*) Greece, And
the grandeur that was Rome” in one poem and also wrote of a time when
“I was a child and she was a child”  referring to a “maiden” who
“lived with no other thought Than to love and be loved by me.” This
author of “To Helen” wrote of a narrator lying down “In her sepulcher
there by the sea.” For 10 points, name this poet of “The Conqueror
Worm” who began another work “Once upon a midnight dreary” in “The
Raven.” twinning The characteristic “cry” of tin when it’s bent is
caused by this phenomenon, and in isometric systems this phenomenon
can generate the “iron cross” configuration. The Manebach and Carlsbad
laws cover some instances of this process, which can occur through
displacive polymorphism. Its polysynthetic form generates several
parallel surfaces. Orthoclase feldspar often shows the (*) penetration
form of this phenomenon, while it’s not metamorphosis but the contact
form of it has a single composition surface. The Brazil Law form of
this phenomenon occurs in quartz upon a change in temperature and
pressure. For 10 points, name this phenomenon in which two different
crystals share lattice points. Ultraviolet light [prompt on “light” or
“sunlight”] This is used as a crosslinking agent to bind RNA-binding
proteins to RNA in the CLIP assay. It’s not bleach or ethanol, but
people using fume hoods for tissue culture usually apply this to the
hood for one hour before use. 7-dehydrocholesterol is converted to
cholecalciferol via this phenomenon. Cockayne syndrome is caused by a
defect in a pathway responsible for removing the products of this
phenomenon; that pathway is NER. This phenomenon is responsible for
creating 6,4 products and thymine (*) dimers, and people with
xeroderma pigmentosum are sensitive to it. It is used to visualize
gels that have been stained by ethidium bromide, and this phenomenon
oxidizes melanin, thus darkening skin. For 10 points, name this type
of electromagnetic radiation that has a wavelength between 10 and 400
nm. Ngugi wa Thiong’o This author wrote a novel in which the potency
of a certain drink, known as the “drink of three letters,”  is
described by the equation P=3T. A surprisingly positive note by one
character at the end of that novel explains that a corrupt bureaucrat
was gunned down in his car while waiting for his chauffeur-bodyguard
to bring him rent. Only a donkey is killed when a plane crashes into
the setting of one of this author’s novels, which ends with a man (*)
burning down a brothel after seeing another man patronize it. Another
character created by him killed District Officer Robson but got
betrayed by the protagonist, which led to his hanging. This author
wrote about Wanja who is idolized by Munira in one novel and told of
the betrayal of Kihika by Mugo in another.  For 10 points, name this
author of Petals of Blood and A Grain of Wheat, both of which are set
in his native Kenya. aircraft carrier [or bloody bird farms; do not
accept “helicopter carrier” or “amphibious assault ship”] One country
got one of these objects at a 1998 auction won by the Chong Lot Travel
Agency. Designs for these objects include STOVL, STOBAR, and CATOBAR
types. The first one of these objects created by India is called the
Vikrant. One example of this object was called Varyag but was renamed
Liaoning. The United Kingdom is building a Queen Elizabeth (*) class
of these objects, and it cannot currently use its Illustrious since
all its Superharriers were decommissioned. Russia’s only one of these
objects is the Kuznetsov and France’s is the nuclear-powered. Charles
de Gaulle. The country with the highest active count of these objects
is the United States, which has ten Nimitz-class examples of this
object, most of which are named for presidents. For 10 points, name
these naval warships on which planes can land. Illyrians The second
Roman war with these people was against a former client king that they
had installed after winning a war that started over the death of the
envoy Coruncanius; that former client king was Demetrius of Pharos.
Augustus sent Tiberius to suppress the Great Revolt of these people.
The third Roman war with these people ended with Lucius Anicius Gallus
capturing their king, Gentius, who had been abandoned by his ally (*)
Perseus V of Macedon. During the Crisis of the Third Century, a
namesake group of barracks emperors such as Claudius II and Aurelian
were from here. The first Roman War with these people started when
these people were ruled by Queen Teuta. For 10 points, name this tribe
that lived in a namesake region on the eastern shore of the Adriatic
Sea. Broken Windows theory Sampson and Raudebush argued that the
effect that this theory purports to explain is actually due to
collective efficacy. This idea was outlined by using the example of a
man named Kelly who has to distinguish between “regulars” and
“strangers”. This idea, which was originally outlined in a 1982
Atlantic Monthly  article, was tested by (*) Philip Zimbardo leaving
an abandoned car in both the Bronx and Palo Alto. This idea was first
illustrated in an article by George Kelling and James Q. Wilson, and
inspired William J. Bratton’s “zero- tolerance” policies. For 10
points, name this criminological theory which states that minor crimes
like vandalism signal a breakdown in order that leads to more serious
crime. 2\. This novel begins with a map of the setting that identifies
places like the balneary, the pigsties, and the aedificium, and it is
separated into sections titled for the first through seventh days and
ends with the “Last Sampson and Raudebush argued that the effect that
this theory purports to explain is actually due to collective
efficacy. This idea was outlined by using the example of a man named
Kelly who has to distinguish between “regulars” and “strangers”. This
idea, which was originally outlined in a 1982 Atlantic Monthly
article, was tested by (*) Philip Zimbardo leaving an abandoned car in
both the Bronx and Palo Alto. This idea was first illustrated in an
article by George Kelling and James Q. Wilson, and inspired William J.
Bratton’s “zero- tolerance” policies. For 10 points, name this
criminological theory which states that minor crimes like vandalism
signal a breakdown in order that leads to more serious crime. Angels
in America One character in this play sees two of his ancestors with
the same name who died in two different plagues; those ancestors start
chanting in Hebrew and English at the end of that scene. Another scene
shows the world’s oldest living Bolshevik addressing a crowd in this
play, whose epilogue occurs at the Bethesda Fountain. One character in
this work imagines her travel agent, Mr. Lies, which prompts her to
ask for a tour of (*) Antarctica to see the hole in the ozone layer;
that character is the valium-addicted Harper, while another drug
featured in this play is the experimental AZT. The sections “Millenium
Approaches” and “Perestroika” make up this play that centers on gay
sufferers of AIDS, Prior Walter and Roy Cohn. For 10 points, name this
play, subtitled “A Gay Fantasia on National Themes,” written by Tony
Kushner. the Chinese Great Flood [accept reasonable equivalents] One
person who helped stop this event was a one-eyed ox-eared giant who
was executed for being late to a party celebrating its end. One person
appointed to stop this event was tested by being wedded to two spoiled
princesses whom he nonetheless convinced to live like commoners. One
person was appointed on the advice of the Four Mountains and tried to
use a self- replicating substance stolen from the Supreme Divinity to
stop it; that figure was executed on Feather Mountain for failing. The
figure who managed to stop this event was aided by (*) a black turtle
and a yellow dragon, and worked for thirteen years straight. After
this event, Fengyi martyred himself and became the god He Bo. This
event was stopped by Yu the Great using a series of canals. For 10
points, name this climactic natural disaster from Chinese mythology in
which the Yellow River overflowed. Battle of Mohacs [pronounced “MO-
hatch”] A month before this battle, the victorious side crossed the
Sava River and seized the fortress of Petervarad.  The defeated army
in this battle was commanded by the Archbishop of Kolocsa and its
ruler was wounded and drowned from the weight of his armor in the
Csele River. The result of this battle was overturned in a 1687 battle
at the (*) same site won by Charles V of Lorraine. The losing general
in this battle was Pal Tomori, and the death of the king he served
meant that after this battle, the Crown of St. Stephen went to the
House of Habsburg.  The winner of this battle defeated a frontal
cavalry charge with his janissaries and went on to sack and then
retreat from Buda. For 10 points, name this 1526 defeat of Louis II by
Suleiman the Magnificent that led to the Ottoman conquest of Hungary.
Poisson equation For an incompressible flow, one method of solving the
Navier-Stokes equation involves taking the divergence of the momentum
terms to find a “pressure” version of this equation. The time-
independent Klein-Gordon equation reduces to one version of it, which
has an extra lambda-squared term subtracted from one side. Solutions
to that modification of this equation are sums of Yukawa potentials.
An exponential term is added to one side of this equation in an
extension commonly used to model solvation; that extension is co-named
for (*) Boltzmann. For gravity, one side of this equation is four pi G
rho, and this equation is commonly solved using the method of images.
For 10 points, name this equation which states that negative free-
charge density equals del squared of the potential, the inhomogeneous
version of Laplace’s equation. the crucifixion [or Jesus Christ on the
cross; prompt on answers mentioning the “death of Jesus”] A soldier in
pink full body armor with a pink armored horse appears in one of
Cranach the Elder’s versions of this scene, which divides the people
in the scene into good and evil groups. This scene is the centerpiece
of the predella to the San Zeno altarpiece by Mantegna. This scene is
shown between Saint Sebastian and Saint Anthony in the (*) Isenheim
Altarpiece, and it often includes the letters “INRI” above the central
figure. Another painting of this scene includes a man in a black hat
jumping a wall in the distance and uses shades of red and orange for
the landscape behind three Breton women who surround the central
figure. For 10  points, name this scene that is depicted in “Yellow”
by Paul Gauguin. Edward IV [or 4th Duke of York before “Yorkist” is
read; or 7th Earl of March; prompt on  “Edward”; prompt on “Duke of
York” before “Yorkist” is read; prompt on “Earl of March”] For a short
period of time, this king was imprisoned at Middleham Castle after his
father-in-law, Lord Rivers, was beheaded. This man ditched the Battle
of Hexham, where his troops won, in order to court his wife, whom he
later cheated on with the wife of a goldsmith, Jane Shore. This king
padded his treasury with the bribe he received from the French king at
the Treaty of Picquigny, signed after he invaded France with the
support of Charles the Bold. This man won the Battle of Barnet with
the help of his brother George, Duke of (*) Clarence, whom he turned
on and had executed by “drown[ing] in a butt of Malmsey.” This husband
of Elizabeth Woodville slaughtered tons of nobles and took Henry VI
prisoner after a 1471 battle, though his own sons died in captivity as
the “Princes of the Tower.” For 10 points, name this Yorkist king who
won the Battle of Tewkesbury. dark energy [accept quintessence; do not
accept “dark matter”] The existence of this substance in a flat
universe would cause the linear term of the late-time integrated
Sachs-Wolfe effect to dominate the higher- order terms. One model of
it states that it initially stays less than the radiation density,
then takes on its present characteristics after matter domination. The
Blanco telescope is central to a namesake survey of this substance.
Evidence of it was first found by the High-Z (*) Supernova Search Team
and the Supernova Cosmology Project, which won Schmidt, Pearlmutter,
and Reiss the Nobel. The equation of state parameter for this
substance must be less than negative one-thirds and has been measured
to around negative one, suggesting that it is accounted for by the
cosmological constant. For 10 points, name this substance which drives
the expansion of the accelerating universe and comprises about 68% of
the universe. Ludwig Wittgenstein This man’s philosophy was viewed
through an aesthetic lens in a book by Marjorie Perloff. One of his
students extended his arguments to show that the mind is not mentally
active while sleeping; that work,  Dreaming, is by Norman Malcolm. One
work ABOUT this philosopher’s thought outlines the “quus” function and
states the skeptical solution and the straight solution to his rule-
following paradox. A key element of his philosophy was outlined by the
example of (*) builders who communicate using the words “rock,”
“slab,” “pillar,”  and “beam.” Another of his arguments considers a
group who are only allowed to look inside their own boxes, each of
which contains a beetle. For 10 points, name this author who was re-
interpreted by Saul Kripke in a book about this man “on Rules and
Private Language” and who developed the idea of language- games in
Philosophical Investigations. “The Lady of Shalott” This poem
describes a character “Like some bold seer in a trance” before that
character’s “blood was frozen slowly.” This poem tells of “a song that
echoes cheerly From the river winding clearly” before describing “a
troop of damsels,” “An abbot on an ambling pad,” and a “long-hair’d
page in crimson” as some of the “Shadows of the world” that appear to
a character who later declares, “I am (*) half sick of shadows.”  A
character in this poem says, “The curse is upon me,” when her mirror
cracks after she hears a man singing “Tirra lirra;” that man is
described as having “coal-black curls” that “From underneath his
helmet flow’d.” This poem ends with the line, “She has a lovely face;
God in his mercy lend her grace,” which is spoken by Sir Lancelot. For
10  points, name this poem about a woman who weaves images of Camelot
written by Alfred, Lord Tennyson. trp operon [prompt on “trp”] One
protein encoded by this system also controls the AroH, Arol, and mtr
clusters. One mutation in this system in S. typhimurium allows the use
of anthralinic acid as a growth factor. In some species, one part of
this system requires the MtrB-encoded TRAP protein, whose 11 subunits
bind to a series of G slash U A G  repeats. This system is activated
by the formation of a certain 2-3 hairpin. This structure’s regulatory
region encodes a leader peptide that (*) cannot be synthesized if the
product of this system is unavailable, resulting in the formation of a
3-4 hairpin that stops transcription of structural genes A through E.
For 10 points, name this cluster of repressible and attenuable genes
that controls the synthesis of an aromatic amino acid symbolized W.
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan [or al-Mamlakah al-Urduniyah al-
Haashimiyah] One leader of this nation was killed by Mustafa Ashu, a
tailor’s apprentice, and this country is home to the relatively
moderate Islamic Action Front. It is not Pakistan, but a training
mission in this nation was headed by Zia-ul-Haq. A war in this
country, which began with a series of hijackings at Dawson’s Field,
was ended by the Cairo Agreement and was triggered by a series of
attacks by the Fedayeen. That conflict lent its name to an (*)
organization that later carried out the Munich Massacre, called Black
September. This nation, whose rulers are from the Hashemite dynasty,
lost control of the West Bank after allying with Egypt and Syria
during the Six-Day war. For 10 points, name this country ruled by King
Hussein’s son, King Abdullah. Mexico [or the United Mexican States; or
Estados Unidos de Mexico; or Estados Unidos Mexicanos] One novel set
in this country ends with a man dying while having sex, after which
his partner eats matches that somehow catch fire and burn down the
ranch. The protagonist of a novel set in this country is engaged to
John Brown and is haunted by her mother’s ghost; that novel is divided
into sections named for the twelve months, each of which begins with a
(*) recipe used by the protagonist, Tita de la Garza. A poem by an
author from here wrote of a “tree that is firmly rooted and that
dances, turning course of a river” that is “arriving forever.” The
author of Like Water for Chocolate is from this country, as is the man
who wrote “The Dialectic of Solitude” in a collection of essays that
also includes “The Sons of La Malinche.” For 10 points, name this
country that produced the author of “Sunstone” and The Labyrinth of
Solitude, Octavio Paz. Oliver Wendell Holmes's dissenting opinion in
Lochner v. New York A recent book by David Bernstein attacking this
opinion accuses its author of eschewing natural law in favor of
"German legal positivism." This dissenting opinion was effectively
adopted by the Supreme Court in  Nebbia v. New York. This opinion
proclaims that "This case is decided upon an economic theory which a
large part of the country does not entertain," and that "The
Fourteenth (*) Amendment does not enact Mr. Herbert Spenser's Social
Statics. " The case producing this opinion arose from a dispute over a
law restricting the number of hours of work by an individual per week
in bakeries. For 10 points, name this opinion given in a 1905 case in
which Justice Rufus Peckham delivered a majority opinion on
substantive due process, striking down restrictions of the "freedom of
contract," and ushering in this case's namesake "era." Taoism [or
Daoism] In a core text of this religion, a dying man tells his visitor
to imagine the world as a large furnace and the Creator as a
blacksmith. In this religion’s cosmology, the heaven and earth
combined are represented by the gourd, whereas the human body contains
three regions known as “cinnabar fields,” including one in the lower
abdomen that is depleted of energy any time someone masturbates. One
of this religion’s texts consists of Inner, Outer, and Mixed Chapters
of differing authorship, and includes a bit in which its namesake
expresses doubt as to whether he is (*) dreaming of a butterfly or
vice versa. Another of its texts begins “The way that can be followed
is not the eternal way,” and elucidates the principle of action
through inaction, or wu wei. For 10 points, name this religion whose
precepts are illustrated by the Zhuangzhi and Dao De Jing, which was
written by Lao-tzu. Ronald Dworkin This man stated that engaging the
numinous doesn’t necessarily involve accepting the “Sistine god” in
his latest work. One of this man’s essays is a criticism of Isaiah
Berlin and argued that there was no distinction between positive and
negative liberty. This man wrote that a secular value of human life
can be placed using the notion of a natural “investment” that may be
(*) wasted. One of his thought experiments posited a figure that would
be stymied by incommensurable standards, even though he possesses
infinite time, full knowledge, and immense wisdom; that figure always
achieves the one right answer in any given case and is named Judge
Hercules.  This man strongly criticized HLA Hart’s legal positivism
with his interpretive theory. For 10 points, name this widely-cited
American legal philosopher who wrote Life’s Dominion  and Law’s
Empire. Islamic marriages [or weddings] There is a “triple” type of
one method to undo this procedure, which is effective immediately upon
execution; another method to undo this procedure is called khula. Both
of those methods require the observation of iddah for the next
iteration of this action. This practice requires mehr for the
procedure to be valid, and there exists some controversy over the
acceptability of a type of this practice known as (*)  mut’ah, which
has a fixed duration. This practice, known as nikah, is permitted to
be done up to four times without being broken between men of a certain
religion and women who belong to the “people of the book.” For 10
points, name this process by which a man and woman are joined under
guidelines in the Hadith and Quran. Howards End In this novel, an
Oxford student is told to give 5,000 pounds of another character’s
money to a man who refuses the check and is subsequently evicted from
his apartment. A woman who is at first thought to be mentally ill is
revealed to be pregnant instead when she returns to London to see her
pneumonic Aunt Juley.  In another scene from this novel, Dolly brings
news that a woman (*) willed her house to a woman of another family,
but Dolly’s husband decides not to execute the handwritten will; that
male character reports a heart attack to the police after he beats a
man with the flat of a German sword, which causes him to fall into a
bookshelf and die. In this novel, Charles is sentenced to three years
in jail for the manslaughter of Leonard Bast. For 10 points, name this
novel, about the Wilcoxes’ title estate that is finally granted to
Margaret Schlegel, written by E. M. Forster. “Boule de Suif” [or “Ball
of Fat” or “Ball of Lard” or “Dumpling” or “Butterball”] One character
in this story spies through his bedroom keyhole to discover the
“mysteries of the corridor”  and sees a woman in blue cashmere and
white lace rebuff the advances of man who departs with a kiss.  One
character with a big red beard was once fooled into thinking he was
appointed prefect, but his position was not recognized by the clerk of
the office; that character supplies a bottle of rum when his
companions complain of hunger, and later he (*) hums the Marseillaise
as the title character weeps. The title character of this story
relieves the party’s hunger by producing a basket of food from
underneath her seat. However, the rest of the group pushes her to
sleep with a Prussian officer in order to continue traveling. For 10
points, name this story about the prostitute Elizabeth Rousset,
written by Guy de Maupassant. Franco-Prussian War [or Franco-German
before “German” is read] During this war, the Meteor gunboat was
engaged in a prearranged, indecisive duel outside Havana Harbor. One
new national holiday celebrating a battle in this war was set for 2
September. The losing side’s army was forced westwards in the Battles
of Spicheren and Wörth, but were prevented from going further by the
Battle of Mars-la-Tour, which was lost by Marshal (*) Bazaine, who
also lost the subsequent Battle of Gravelotte, which trapped him in
Metz. The withdrawal of a Roman garrison by the losing side in this
war let Italy complete the Risorgimento. In this war, Léon Gambetta
escaped his capital in a hot air balloon to organize resistance. A
government change occurred in this war after the defeat at Sedan. For
10 points, name this 1870-1871  war that resulted in the formation of
the Second German Empire, which took Alsace-Lorraine from its defeated
opponent. Alexander Mitchell Palmer This man came in third place in a
race for Pennsylvania senator against Gifford Pinchot and Boies
Penrose, and this man once testified in front of the Overman Committee
that the US Brewers Association had pro-German sentiments. This man
served as Alien Property Custodian before rising to his most important
post. At one cabinet meeting, this man demanded that Assistant
Secretary of Labor Louis Freeland Post be fired for opposing him. This
man used the Lever Act against a coal strike led by (*) John L. Lewis.
This man once tried to convince his superior to pardon Eugene Debs on
the eve of Lincoln’s birthday. Luigi Galleani planted a bomb
underneath this man’s porch, which led to a series of 556 deportations
over two months. For 10 points, name this Attorney General known as
the “fighting Quaker”, who arrested many anarchists in his namesake
raids. Mark Antony [or Marcus Antonius] One general serving this
leader executed Quintus Labienus after winning the Battle of the
Cilician Gates. That victory by Publius Ventidius Bassus was followed
up three years later by a campaign led by this person who helped Herod
the Great recapture Jerusalem but ended up disastrously defeated.
Despite that unfortunate fact, this leader carried out a mock (*)
triumph in his capital city. This leader divided his half of the
empire into kingdoms ruled by the children of his lover in the
donations of Alexandria. In his last battle, he abandoned his forces
to chase after the retreating flagship of an allied fleet, leaving his
own fleet to be crushed by Marcus Agrippa, a general who served
Octavian. For 10 points, name this Roman leader who was defeated at
the Battle of Actium alongside his Egyptian lover, Cleopatra.
{zebrafish} [or Danio {rerio} or D. rerio] Danilova’s study of this
organism discovered a new immunoglobulin isotype, dubbed IgZ. This
organism’s montalcino, yquem, and dracula mutants are models of
various types of porphyria. The Tol2 transposon is often used in
transgenesis experiments in this organism, and mutagenesis is usually
performed in these organisms using ENU. Mutations in SLC24A5 in this
organism cause its skin to turn gold. The KDM6B.1  histone demethylase
is required for regeneration in this organism, which has a notable
“Casper” strain that is 100% transparent. It’s not Drosophila, but
Christine (*) Nusslein-Volhard works with this organism, which was the
subject of the large scale Tubigen/Boston forward screen. This member
of family Cyprinidae gets its name for the large stripes on its flank.
For 10 points, name this aquatic model organism. All My Sons In this
work, a woman accuses a man of being “ashamed” after he had just
kissed her, which leads to a monologue in which the man tells of a
friend who gave up his last pair of dry socks after several days of
rain; that story is about how he was in charge of a company, all of
whom died in the war. One character in this play asks her neighbor for
the horoscope of her son on the day of his (*) disappearance, and in a
climactic scene,  Anne reads a letter from that son, her ex-fiance,
which explains that, even though he was thought to be missing, he
actually committed suicide because he was related to his father. This
news causes Larry’s father to shoot himself at the end of this work.
For 10 points, name this play, in which Joe Keller shipped faulty
airplane parts, by Arthur Miller. Spain One composer from this country
was so impressed by the pianist Malats that he completed the last two
books of a suite to showcase extreme virtuosity on the piano. The
first piece of that “collection of 12  impressions” is an A minor
“Evocation,” and its composer also wrote a “Prelude” and “Orientale”
to begin another work. Another composer wrote “Distant Dance” as one
of a set of nocturnes using folk music from this country, and he wrote
the (*) “Dance of the Miller’s Wife” and the “Dance of the Magistrate”
in one work, while another includes the “Ritual Fire Dance.” For 10
points, name this country, home to Isaac Albeniz and the composer of
Love the Magician and The Three-Cornered Hat, Manuel de Falla, where a
popular style of dance is flamenco. liquid-liquid extraction [prompt
on separation] A countercurrent version of this technique is performed
in a Craig apparatus or a mixer-settler. This technique can be used
alongside a quaternary ammonium salt in a form of catalysis. A version
of this technique using isoamyl alcohol and phenol-chloroform is used
on proteins and DNA. It’s not titration, but a funnel with a stopcock
on the bottom is commonly used to perform this technique. This
technique, which is commonly done as part of the (*) workup of a
microscale reaction, relies on a substance having a decent partition
coefficient between an aqueous phase and an organic phase, which layer
on top of one another. For 10 points, name this technique in which a
mixture is separated based on its differential solubility between two
non- mixing liquids. Gitanjali [prompt on “song offerings” before
mentioned] This collection includes a poem that begins, “The same
stream of life that runs through my veins night and day runs through
the world and dances in rhythmic measures.” Religious imagery in this
work can be seen in poems like one beginning “Thy gifts to us mortals
fulfill all our needs” as well as one in which the speaker stands
“alone and speechless” before the “King of kings.” One work in this
collection ends, “Ages pass, and still thou pourest, and still there
is room to fill” after stating, “This (*) frail vessel thou emptiest
again and again.” An introduction about a conversation with a doctor
was written for this collection by W. B. Yeats, and its first work
begins “Thou hast made me endless, such is thy pleasure.” For 10
points, name this collection of “song offerings” by the Bengali Nobel
Laureate, Rabindranath Tagore. snakes [or serpents or dragon] A
popular Taoist legend has Xu Xian marry a woman who was originally a
white one of these creatures.  A minister of Gong Gong was one of
these creatures named Xiangliu, who was killed by Yu the Great. While
visiting Mount Black Wind, Sun Wukong kills the White-Robed Scholar,
who took this form. The creator gods Fu Xi and Nu Gua were often
depicted as half human, half this creature. One of these creatures was
defeated with the help of a woman turned into a comb and a series of
doors hiding (*) vats of wine; that example of these creatures had
eight heads, was the source of the sword Kusanagi, was named Orochi,
and was killed by Susanoo. For 10 points, name these creatures, who in
other Asian mythologies make up the animal half of a Naga. pirates
[prompt on slavers, raiders, freebooters, robbers and equivalents]
Pausanias claims that one member of this profession, an Euboean son of
Crius,  is the source of an alternative tradition for the name of
Pythos. In the Homeric Hymn to Demeter, Demeter pretends to be Dosos,
a person wronged by people in this profession. According to
Apollodorus, a mistaken belief that Catreus was one of these people
led his son Althaemenes to unknowingly slay him. Its not swineherding,
but Eumaeus was in Sidon when these people took him to (*) Ithaca. One
person demanded the right to sing one last song from some of these
people and ended up being rescued from them by the dolphins that he
attracted; that man was Arion. Dionysus turned some Tyrrhenian people
in this profession into dolphins after using vines to fill up their
boat. For 10 points, name these people who often appear in children’s
stories making their captives walk the plank. The Canterbury Tales One
story in this book tells of a girl named Sophie who is mortally
wounded in five places before Prudence convinces her husband, Melibee,
to forgive the attackers; that story in this book has the same
narrator as a story about a knight who prepares to battle Sir Olifaunt
to win the elf-queen. One of the characters in this book wears a
brooch inscribed with the Latin “Amor vincit Omnia” and is named (*)
Madame Eglentyne, while another character is a red-haired man with a
large wart on his nose who likes dirty jokes. A story in this book
tells of Pertelote who is loved by the rooster Chanticleer, and it
begins by describing a group of people departing from the Tabard Inn
to visit the shrine of Thomas a Becket. For 10 points, name this book
that includes stories told by a Reeve, a Merchant, and the Wife of
Bath, written by Geoffrey Chaucer. gas chromatography [prompt on
“chromatography”] One quantity important in this technique is
calculated in a linear fashion by the Van del Dool and Kratz equation.
An inverse version of this technique is commonly used to measure the
surface energy of solids. In a standardization method used alongside
this technique, a series of n-alkanes is given an index equal to 100
times the number of carbons they have. In this technique, an inert
carrier flows into a column oven attached to an autoinjector; the
sample then passes into a (*) flame ionization detector. This
technique, which uses a retention index named for Kovats, is commonly
used before mass spectrometry of simple molecules in intro organic
chemistry classes. For 10 points, name this form of chromatography in
which the analyte is in a vapor phase. Faust [accept things like
“Faust: Part One” until “second part” is read] In a short scene set in
a Cathedral in this play, an evil spirit stands behind a woman and
torments her about her pregnancy while an organ plays and the chorus
sings the Dies Irae. In the second part of this play, one character
convinces the emperor to start using paper money with pictures of
Simon Magus on it. One character in this work is sentenced to death
after drowning her illegitimate child, but when she refuses to escape
from prison, she earns salvation. In a later scene of this play, the
(*) homunculus created by Wagner leads the protagonist to classical
Walpurgisnacht. A poodle comes into the study of the protagonist and
transforms into the antagonist at the start of this work, and the
protagonist later seduces Gretchen with the help of Mephistopheles.
For 10 points, name this tragedy based on a soul-selling legend by
Goethe. Gregory [or Gregorius] The tenth pope with this name was
elected after the longest papal election in history and, during the
Second Council of Lyon, promulgated the bull that created the conclave
system. One pope with this name commissioned Ignazio Danti to create
the Gallery of Maps, while another passed the bull Audita tremendi to
call for the Third Crusade. The thirteenth pope of this name held a
celebratory Te Deum after hearing of the St. (*) Bartholomew’s Day
Massacre. One pope with this name feuded with a figure who walked in
the snow barefoot to repent during the Investiture Controversy.
Aloysius Lilius developed a reform promoted by another pope of this
name in the bull Inter gravissimas, which reduced the number of leap
years. For 10 points, name this papal name, one holder of which is the
namesake of the modern calendar. Arnold Schoenberg This composer wrote
a single-movement work in E major for 10 winds and 5 strings that,
despite being called a chamber work, requires a conductor, while
another of his works begins with a pp descending quarter, dotted-
eighth, sixteenth motif in the violas and cellos, which are soon
joined by the violins. In another work by this composer of the
Kammersymphonie, after the narrator finishes speaking, the men’s
chorus sings the (*) Shema Yisroel with the orchestra. This composer
wrote a work in one movement with five clear sections for string
sextet, which he later re-orchestrated for string orchestra. This
composer of A Survivor from Warsaw based that other work on a Richard
Dehmel poem. For 10 points, name this Second Viennese School composer
of Transfigured Night. boson These particles’ creation and
annihilation operators are linked to spin operators via the Holstein-
Primakoff transformation. The commutator of the creation operator for
these particles is equal to the Kronecker delta of the states that the
operator is acting on. The degeneracy divided by an exponential minus
1 gives the expected number of these particles in a given state, in
contrast with their (*) counterparts which have a plus one in the
denominator. A collection of these particles will all collapse to the
ground state at a low enough temperature, resulting in a new highly-
degenerate form of matter. These particles include the carriers of the
weak force, W and Z, as well as a particle whose associated field’s
symmetry breaking imparts mass. For 10 points, name these particles
which have integer spin, as opposed to fermions. Vasa Dynasty [or
Vasaatten] One ruler from this dynasty was commemorated in a monument
showing him holding a sword and a cross and standing on top of a
column. Another ruler was killed by ingesting arsenic-laced pea soup.
The first ruler of this dynasty employed Laurentius Andrae to
translate the bible into his nation’s language and was advised by the
Petri brothers. That ruler is the origin of the name that Michael
Pascal attempted to force upon (*) Olaudah Equiano. A more famous
member won the Battle of Rain during his invasion of Bavaria. Two
rulers of this dynasty employed foreign minister Axel Oxenstierna, and
another corresponded with Rene Descartes. For 10 points, name this
dynasty that included Eric XIV and Christina, and a ruler killed at
the Battle of Lutzen during the Thirty Years’ War, nicknamed “the Lion
of the North”, Gustavus Adolphus. United States Presidential Election
of 1852 The third place candidate in this election served as defense
counsel for Shadrach Minkins, who was captured in Massachusetts.
Charles J. Jenkins was the vice presidential candidate for the Union
Party, which nominated Daniel Webster as its candidate. The winning VP
in this election was the only US executive to take his oath on foreign
soil and died of TB (*) 45 days into his term. John Hale was the Free
Soil candidate, while the second-place candidate in this election ran
with William Alexander Graham. The Democratic candidate ran with Rufus
King and was a dark horse, while the Whig candidate commanded forces
landing at Veracruz in the Mexican-American war. For 10 points, name
this election in which “Old Fuss and Feathers” Winfield Scott was
defeated by Franklin Pierce. Imperial Russia [or Russian Empire; do
not accept “Soviet Union” or “USSR”] A painter from this country drew
a stand full of birds, a red-clad violinist, and jesters in court and
is named Valery Jacobi. Another painter from here showed Indian rebels
being blown from British guns in one work and a huge pile of skulls in
another work. Besides Apotheosis of War, another work from this
country shows a shirtless man with a lute in his lap sitting at a
table amidst a crowd, above which a few multicolored pikes are
visible; that work depicts a large group of men laughing as one figure
(*) writes with a white feathered pen. An artist from this country
painted a youthful, fair- skinned character in the middle of a group
of 11  ragged-looking men who lean forward to pull a ship. For 10
points, name this home country of Vasily Vereshchagin and Ilya Repin
who painted Bargehaulers on the Volga. lysozyme This protein’s F57I
and W64R mutants are associated with familial renal amyloidosis. The
mechanism of this enzyme was solved by Volcado et al using bi-
fluorinated substrates, which determined that this enzyme uses an SN2
reaction to displace its second product. The active site of this
enzyme contains glutamate-35  and asparagine-52, and the mechanism of
this enzyme was originally posited to have a glycosyl carbocation
intermediate by David (*) Phillips. Structural studies of this enzyme
often use its hen’s egg white variety. This enzyme breaks the beta-
one-four linkages between N-acetylglucosamine and N-acetylmuramic acid
found in peptidoglycan, and like penicillin was originally discovered
by Alexander Fleming. For 10 points, name this enzyme found in milk,
saliva, and tears, which breaks down bacterial cell walls. John
Broadus Watson With Robert Yerkes this man published Methods of
Studying Vision in Animals. This associate of engram-hunter Karl
Lashley conducted an experiment that inspired the book Kinaesthetic
and Organic Sensations.  Mary Cover Jones partially replicated an
experiment performed by this man on a subject named Peter. This man
conducted an experiment in which he shortened a (*) maze through which
animals had been trained to run; that experiment, conducted with
Harvey Carr, was called “Kerplunk.” Another experiment carried out by
this man with the help of Rosalie Rayner used a steel bar and a hammer
to condition the subject into fearing anything white and fluffy. For
10 points, name this behavioral psychologist who conducted the “Little
Albert” experiment. Washington, D.C.  [or District of Columbia] One
cathedral located in this city contains a sculpture of people emerging
from a turbulent void, called  Ex Nihilo. One installation in this
city has a rock inscribed with “I hate war” and contains five
waterfalls of varying size. A group of sculptures in this city
includes the 12th entry of David Smith’s Cubi series, a shiny
depiction of a cane-wielding man with a basket on his back entitled
Kiepenkerl, by Jeff Koons, and “Wish Tree” by Yoko Ono; those works
are found in the (*) Hirshhorn Sculpture Garden. Frederick Hart
sculpted a group of three soldiers next to a monument in this city,
which was designed by Maya Lin and consists of a gabbro wall with 58
thousand names carved into it. For 10 points, name this city, for
which Daniel Chester French sculpted a seated president for the
Lincoln Memorial. falsifiability [accept word forms of “falsify”;
prompt on “testing a hypothesis” or similar because of the Duhem-Quine
clue] This idea was dismissed by Laudan as “toothless” because it is
unable to perform the “stable-cleaning”  duties it for which it was
posited. The “hard core” of a program is protected from this  by an
auxiliary belt according to the author of Criticism and the Growth of
Knowledge. An early version of this idea can only be applied to
bundles, rather than things in isolation, according to the Duhem-Quine
thesis. A modified version of this idea applies it in degrees, rather
than all-or- none; that is its (*) “sophisticated” version. This idea
was posited as a solution to the problem of demarcation and the
problem of induction .  A classic example of doing this  is finding a
black swan. For 10 points, name this criteria that distinguishes a
scientific statement from a non-scientific one by its ability to be
proven wrong, expounded by Karl Popper. Kruskal’s algorithm [prompt on
“minimum spanning tree finding algorithm” until “minimum spanning
tree” is mentioned] For this algorithm to be implemented efficiently,
a fast union-find data structure is required, because it allows for
the determination of connectivity. The complexity of the standard form
of this algorithm can be reduced from O(E logE) to the mathematically
equivalent O(E logV) by using properties of the logarithm.  Upon
initialization, this algorithm creates a (*) forest of size V and then
utilizes the cut property by sorting all edges of the graph and then
checking for cycles with the lowest-weight, unused edge. This
algorithm differs from another that accomplishes a similar task
because this algorithm works for disconnected graphs. For 10 points,
name this greedy algorithm for finding the minimum spanning tree of a
graph, which is more generalized than Prim’s algorithm. Hebrew The
protagonist of one work in this language travels from Brod to Galicia
under pressure from his wife, Frummet. An epistolary novel in this
language describes the rebound marriage of the protagonist to Michael
Somo after she divorced her physically abusive first husband, Alex
Gideon. That former work in this language tells of the journey of Nuta
and Reb Yudel, who is looking for dowries for his daughters.  In
addition to (*) The Bridal Canopy and a work about Ilana Brandstatter,
the narrator of another work in this language fantasizes about the
twin Arab boys she used to play with as a child, while in the present,
the narrator, Hannah Gonen, suffers through her marriage to the title
character. This is the language of the books Black Box  and My
Michael. For 10 points, name this language used by authors like Shmuel
Agnon and Amos Oz, who is from Israel. Algiers An agreement signed in
this city ended the Ethiopia-Eritrea war. One agreement signed in this
city was unable to settle a boundary dispute about the Shatt Al-Arab,
and was unable to stop the Iran-Iraq war.  One battle in this city
began after a group of female militants bombed a travel agency and a
milk bar. One agreement named for this city ended the (*) Iran Hostage
crisis. Operation Terminal was an attack on this city, leading to the
surrender of Alphonse Juin. Jacques Massu tortured several prisoners
during one battle in this city, which was the subject of a Gillo
Pontecorvo film. Along with Casablanca and Oran, this city was a
landing site of Operation Torch. For 10 points, name this city, the
capital of a nation in which the FLN kicked out the French. doctors
[or physicians] One character with this profession tells a story about
how in Staten Island he had taught a married couple how to have sex
after finding out that the woman was a virgin; a few days afterwards,
the husband showed up and punched him in the nose. That character with
this profession is absurdly proclaimed dead by Gus and Wes while he is
standing right next to them, and he is later declared officially (*)
dead when his name is found on the manifest of a plane crashed by
McWatt, even though he is still alive. Another character with this
profession marries Joyce Lanyon after his first wife, Leora Tozer,
dies from a contaminated cigarette. That character of this profession
is invited to the McGurk institute by his teacher, Max Gottlieb. For
10 points, name this profession of Daneeka from Catch-22 and Sinclair
Lewis’s Martin Arrowsmith. The Heart is a Lonely Hunter One character
in this novel tells of a man who signed up local blacks for the “Grand
League of Pincheners”  as part of a fake government pension plan. That
story is about the crook B. F. Mason and is told by Portia to her
father just before she tells her father that he never really got to
know her husband, Highboy. An alcoholic character in this novel (*)
beats his head and hands against a brick wall after another man leaves
a bar, which prompts that other man to offer lodging for the night.
This novel switches perspectives between main characters like the old
black Dr. Copeland, the cafe owning Biff Brannon, and the cafe
frequenting Jake Blount. During a visit to an asylum, another
character learns that his friend Spiros Antonapoulos is dead, which
causes him to shoot himself. For 10 points, name this novel centering
on the deaf-mute John Singer, written by Carson McCullers. Hartree-
Fock method [accept coupled cluster or configuration interaction
before mention] One extension to this method uses the Davidson
correction to account for its size-inconsistency and adds a series of
terms corresponding to single, double, etc. excitations. Another
extension to it uses the cluster operator. Those methods are the full
configuration interaction and coupled cluster methods, which take
correlation into account. One quantity important in this method has a
term that is equal to the sum over the differences of the Coulomb
operator and the (*) exchange operator. This non-relativistic method
assumes that a many-particle wavefunction is the anti-symmetrized
product of several one-particle wavefunctions, and this method
requires solving the energy equation until a self-consistent field is
achieved. For 10 points, name this variational mean-field method in
quantum chemistry used to calculate the wavefunction of a many-
electron system. Yggdrasil This object is said to be home to more
serpents than any fool can imagine, including “the one ruling from the
ditch” and “the winding one.” This thing is listed first among objects
that are the noblest of their kind.  This object is supported by three
wells, including a freezing one that is the source of 26 different
rivers. Four (*) stags live on this object, which shakes and groans
immediately after one god converses with a severed head in one event.
A squirrel runs back and forth between a dragon and an eagle living on
this object in order to carry mean messages, and this object is gnawed
upon by a serpent living in the wastes of Nastrond named Nidhogg. In
order to obtain the runes, one god used his spear to hang himself from
this object for nine days; that god is Odin. For 10  points, name this
object that holds up the nine worlds in Norse Mythology, which is a
gigantic ash tree. Kingdom of Bohemia [or Ceske kralovstvi; or Cechy;
or Konigreich Bohmen; or Regnum Bohemiae; prompt on “Czech Republic”or
“Czech state”] One king of this region was called “the Iron and Golden
King” because of successful battles of expansion such as the Battle of
Kressenbrun; that king was Ottokar II, who belonged to its Premyslid
Dynasty which died out and was succeeded in 1310 by the House of
Luxembourg. The County of Kladsko is traditionally part of the kingdom
named for this region. The (*) Utraquists emerged victorious in a long
religious civil war against the Taborites in this region; that war was
named for a man burned at the Council of Constance, Jan Hus. The
Battle of White Mountain ended an insurrection in this region led by
those who carried out the Defenestration of Prague. For 10 points,
name this historical region that forms the core of the modern Czech
Republic. the Seven Ages of Man speech [or the “All the world’s a
stage” speech; accept Jacques’s speech before “Jaques” is mentioned]
One figure described in this speech is said to be “Sighing like a
furnace, with a woeful ballad Made to his mistress’ eyebrow.” That
lover had earlier been “creeping like a snail Unwillingly to school”
with “his satchel And shining morning face.” This speech is given
after a man interrupts a meal with his sword drawn and demands food;
that character,  (*) Orlando, is welcomed to the table by Duke Senior
who says, “we are not all alone unhappy,” before this speech is given.
This speech begins by describing “the infant, Mewling and puking in
the nurse’s arms” and ends by describing a “second childishness and
mere oblivion” without teeth, eyes, taste, and finally, “sans
everything.” For 10 points, name this speech given by the Melancholy
Jaques in Shakespeare’s As You Like It, which begins with a metaphor
about life as a certain place “And all the men and women merely
players.” Qin dynasty [or Ch’in Dynasty; Kin Dynasty] This family’s
growing strength was addressed in one school of diplomatic thought via
vertical and horizontal alliances. Before coming to power, it was
promised all the land that it could recover from the Dog Rong tribes
in the West. One member of this family, Duke Mu, was one of the Five
Hegemons. After adhering to a philosophy taught by Shang Yang, its
namesake (*) dynasty carried out the “burning of books and the burying
of scholars” to end the Hundred Schools of Thought period. It started
the Great Wall and defeated six other major states to put an end to
the Warring States period. This 15-year dynasty was toppled by the Han
and its first emperor was buried in Xi’an with a terracotta army. For
10 points, name this dynasty that unified China under its first
emperor, who took the title Shihuangdi. Hox genes or Homeobox genes An
intergenic, long non-coding RNA that directs PRC2-catalyzed
condensation of chromatin, called HOTAIR, is expressed from the same
cluster as these genes. One set of these is activated by TET2-induced
hydroxylation of methylcytosines, and they are also activated by the
retinoic acid receptor. In the brain, these genes are responsible for
the specification of rhombomere identity. In humans there are 4
clusters of 13 of each of these arranged collinearly, and they are
expressed in the order they are arranged in the cluster. They bind to
a TAAT consensus sequence via a conserved 60-amino acid helix-turn-
helix domain. In (*) Drosophila, they are activated by gap and pair-
rule genes. Mutations in them cause body segments to appear in the
wrong place or antennae to appear on the head. For 10 points, name
these genes that control body organization during development. human
warfare [or making war; prompt on answers like “combat,” “fighting,”
etc.] In “The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction,”
Benjamin states that fascists have apotheosized this concept. One work
about this practice stated that its precepts would apply etsi deus non
daretur, or even “if God did not exist.” Another work about this
begins with a chapter against moral realism and uses the “Domestic
analogy” to delineate between immoral and moral forms of it; that work
is by (*) Michael Walzer. The repute gained from this activity is the
most inglorious type in Thomas More’s Utopia. This is the first of two
title concepts for which laws were written about in three books by
Hugo Grotius, and was said to be carried out by “all against all” in
Hobbes’s Leviathan.  For 10 points, name this activity described by
Clausewitz as  “a continuation of politics by other means” and whose
“art” was written about by Sun Tzu. uniform distribution The expected
value for the kth order statistic for this distribution is equal to k
divided by quantity n plus one. The problem of estimating an extremum
of this distribution using sampling is called the German Tank problem.
This distribution is the maximal entropy one among all that are
supported within a particular interval. The Pareto distribution is the
conjugate prior of this distribution. If the null hypothesis is true
for a continuous test statistic, the (*) p value follows this
distribution. The variance of this distribution is equal to one-
twelfth times the square of the quantity b minus a, and its
probability density function is equal to one over the length of the
interval within the interval and zero outside of it. For 10 points,
name this distribution followed by a single dice roll or coin flip, in
which every value within the range is equally likely. Moroni One
figure with this name chased away the armies of Amalickah after
raising the “Title of Liberty.”  The eighth chapter of this figure’s
namesake book speaks out against the baptism of children. Statues of
this figure are based on one created by Cyrus Edwin Dallin. This
figure appeared to Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris,
who were known as the (*) Three Witnesses. This man’s people were
slaughtered by the Lamanites. This figure hid the Sword of Laban on
Cumorah Hill and was the last prophet of the Nephites.  This
supernatural figure directed a human to use the seer stones Urim and
Thummim to translate, from “reformed Egyptian,” a pair of golden
plates. For 10 points, name this supernatural figure who appeared to
Joseph Smith, an angel in Mormon doctrine. voting This procedure will
generate a cycle when the Nakamura number is exceeded. Schulze
developed a cloneproof method of doing this based on the Schwartz
method. A maximum likelihood method of doing this is named for Kemeny
and Young. Michael Dummett added a quota element to another procedure
for doing this called the (*) Borda count. Duncan Black showed that in
a one- dimensional system, this procedure will select the median. The
spoiler effect can potentially foil some systems for this practice.
This practice cannot satisfy the criteria of independence of
irrelevant alternatives, universality, Pareto efficiency, and non-
dictatorship according to Arrow’s Impossibility Theorem. For 10
points, name this procedure used in democracies to select leaders.
Emperor of China [or Chinese Emperor; or Ming Emperor; or Qing
Emperor; or Song Emperor; or Tang Emperor; or huangdi; or Leader of
the Ming Cult before “cult”; prompt on emperor; prompt on ruler of
China; do not prompt on answers containing “king”] The chance to hold
this title is lost by the protagonist of the last installment of the
Condor Trilogy when he leaves a cult he led so he can marry. A
character with this title is visiting a prostitute when he is
interrupted by an albino seeking pardons, while another person with
this title is unable to sleep without two men guarding the door and
gets 20 more years to live after visiting hell. A character with this
title has an associate whose visit is commemorated with the
construction of the (*) Prospect Garden. Three of the aforementioned
holders of this title are characters such as the husband of Tangchun,
the man who pardons Song Jiang’s outlaws, and Tang Taizong. For 10
points, name this title that was undermined after the Yellow Turban
Revolt when power was split between three kingdoms after the overthrow
of the Han Dynasty. debates between James Earl “Jimmy” Carter and
Ronald Wilson Regan [all three underlined portions required; accept
answers like 1980 Presidential Debates; prompt on “presidential
debates”] One participant in this event quoted H. L. Mencken as saying
every problem has a simple answer that is  “neat and plausible and
wrong.” David Stockman and George Will were accused of using a stolen
briefing manual from one participant in this event. During this event,
one participant helpfully stated that a billion was a thousand
millions and a trillion was a thousand billions. One participant in
this event was ridiculed for asking his (*) 12-year-old daughter about
nuclear weapons, while repeated attacks on another person’s record on
Medicare were greeted by the line “there you go again.” This event
ended by one participant asking whether the listener was better off
than four years ago. For 10 points, name this rhetorical clash that
occurred between an incumbent president and a former governor of
California before a certain election. Hector Berlioz One work by this
composer introduces two harp parts in the 3/8 second movement, in
which they enter after some string tremolos by playing rising triplet
sixteenths on the F major triad. The chorus alternates between A and B
flat for much of the “Offertorium” section of this composer’s Requiem,
which requires northern, eastern, southern, and western (*) offstage
brass bands. Paganini rejected one of this composer’s works because it
had too many rests in the solo viola part. The third movement of
another work begins with a Ranz des Vaches with an English horn and an
offstage oboe doing a call-and- response; that work’s first movement,
“Reveries – Passions” introduces the idee fixe. For 10 points, name
this composer of Harold in Italy and Symphony Fantastique. the KGB [or
Komitet gosudarstvennoy bezopasnosti; or Committee for State Security;
prompt on Soviet secret police, Soviet intelligence, and logical
equivalents; prompt on Russian secret police, Russian intelligence,
and logical equivalents] This organization was allegedly responsible
for the construction and operation of the Metro-2 system.  Doubt that
this organization actually published US Army Field Manual 30-31B
resurfaced after the discovery of Operation Gladio. This organization
created a unit called the Vympel and carried out Operation Seat 12
against the Vatican and Operation INFEKTION, two (*) disinformation
campaigns. Members of this organization used equipment such as the
Kiss of Death, a lipstick pistol, and the Thing, a bug. Successors to
this organization include the SVR and the FSB, while predecessors to
it include the NKVD, which similarly operated gulags. For 10 points,
name this organization once chaired by Yuri Andropov, the primary
security agency of the old Soviet Union. New Guinea [or Papua Island
before mention; or Irian Island before mention; accept Papua New
Guinea only after “Indonesia” is read and do not accept earlier; do
not accept “Irian Jaya”] One nationalist movement based on this island
used the Morning Star Flag. This island has a namesake singing dog
breed. Its northwestern and southeastern points are known as the
Bird’s Head Peninsula and the Bird’s Tail Peninsula because of its
resemblance to a species of bird predominantly found here, the bird-
of-paradise. The Owen Stanley Range on this island can be traversed
via the (*) Kokoda Track. One region on this island was historically
called Irian Jaya. The highest point on this island is Puncak Jaya.
This island lies west of the Bismarck and Solomon archipelagos. The
Torres Strait separates this island from Australia. For 10 points,
name this second largest island in the world, which is split between
Indonesia and a nation whose name prefixes the name of this island
with Papua. caryatid [prompt on things like “statues” or “statues of
women”] Thomas Shields Clarke created a series of these works
representing seasons, and three of these are found outside the Warsaw
Supreme Court building. Ones representing Architecture and Music are
found in the Saint- Gaudens designed Albright-Knox Gallery in Buffalo.
It’s not the Discobolus or a Venus, but Charles Townley acquired one
of these figures from the Villa Montalto which is currently in the
British Museum. The Canopus View of Hadrian’s villa contains a series
of these figures. The Erechtheion has a (*) porch named for the fact
that it contains six of these figures, one of which was removed as
part of the Elgin marbles. These figures, whose counterparts are
called telamon or atlas, often have a basket or entablature on their
heads. For 10 points, name these architectural supports that take the
shape of women. Sons and Lovers A woman in this novel stops loving her
husband after he gives their first child a haircut while she is
asleep, although she was already turned off from him after finding
unpaid furniture bills in his coat. The protagonist wins first prize
at the Nottingham Castle painting exhibition, which earns him his
brother’s suit from a woman who still keeps a bible that she received
from John Field. At a bar, the protagonist throws a beer in a man’s
face, after which that man gets thrown out of the bar and later gets
fired from his factory job.  (*) Baxter is the husband of one of the
central women in this novel, while another lives on the Leivers’ farm.
The protagonist of this story fails to commit himself to his
relationships with Miriam or Clara Dawes because of his overwhelming
love for his mother, Gertrude. For 10 points, name this novel about
Paul Morel by D. H. Lawrence. Achille-Claude Debussy This composer
wrote a piece whose first section begins in 6/4 but switches to 6/8
before a solo flute introduces the melody in sixteenth triplets; the
third section of that work is marked “lively and tumultuous”  and
begins with trills on C for the timpani. The fourth and last section
of a piano suite by this composer is in F sharp minor and begins with
many bars of staccato arpeggios in the left hand; that is the (*)
“Passepied”  of a suite that begins with a “Prelude” and “Menuet.”
This composer’s works were catalogued by Francois Lesure, which is the
origin of their L numbers. This composer wrote the movements “Dialogue
of the wind and the sea”  and “Play of the Waves,” and he took another
title from a Paul Verlaine poem. For 10 points, name this French
composer of La Mer and “Clair de Lune.” Euthyphro In this work, one
person uses the example of huntsmen attending to dogs and horsemen
attending to horses as examples of the word “attention”. One person
states that disagreements about a number can be solved using
arithmetic as a way of avoiding enmity and anger. One person in this
work is refuted by noting that  “looking after” a certain group is
hubris, and agrees that a carried thing does not have an intrinsic
property of being carried. This work takes place in a (*) King-
Archon’s court, where one character discusses how he is bringing
manslaughter charges against his father. This work outlines five
possible definitions of its central subject, including that it is a
species of justice and that it is what is loved by the gods. For 10
points, name this Platonic dialogue about the nature of piety, which
takes place before Socrates’ trial. Morocco [or Saadi Dynasty before
mention] The 1580 Portuguese Succession Crisis was caused by the
killing by forces of this country of King Sebastian I at the Battle of
the Three Kings; at that battle, the leader of this country, Abd Al-
Malik, also perished.  His brother succeeded him as the ruler of the
Saadi Dynasty that had been established after the defeat of the
Wattasids. Its current (*) Alaouite Dynasty came to power after the
chaos caused by three warring claimants trying to succeed Ahmad Al
Mansur. Wilhelm II failed to isolate Great Britain at the 1906
Algeciras Conference that gave France and Spain rights in this country
that were expanded after the Agadir Crisis via the Treaty of Fez. For
10  points, name this North African nation and site of two pre-First
World War crises whose capital has been at times in cities such as
Marrakech and Rabat. fire [or flame; or burning coals; or similar
answers] A share of this substance is taken from the father and given
to the son at some weddings. The term “homa”  or “havan” is used to
categorize rituals using this substance. In Tamil Nadu, practitioners
of the Timiti ritual show their loyalty to Draupadi by traversing
through this substance. In the Navratri festival, this substance, or
Jyoti, acts as a symbol of the goddess Durga. In the yajna ritual,
this substance acts as an intermediary between the (*) offerer and the
gods. The personification of this substance uses seven tongues to lap
up ghee offered to him. This substance was also used in a now-shunned
practice once commonly performed by recently-widowed women, known as
sati. For 10 points, name this substance, represented by Agni,
commonly used by Hindus to cremate the deceased. Ghosts [or
Gengangere] A female in this play explains a central metaphor in a
speech about “ideas, and lifeless old beliefs” that  “have no
vitality, but they cling to us all the same, and we cannot shake them
off.” Another character in this play requests to be administered
morphine before becoming unresponsive to his mother; that scene occurs
during the sunrise at the end of this play. To avoid negative public
opinion, one character in this work agrees to fund a (*) sailors’
home; that agreement follows from a discussion about the lack of
insurance for a certain building. The illegitimate nature of Johanna’s
pregnancy, which resulted in the birth of Regina, is revealed to
Pastor Manders, who is afraid of being accused of burning down an
orphanage in this play. For 10 points, name this play about Helen and
Oswald Alving by Henrik Ibsen. Geneva The last bishop to rule this
city was Pierre de la Baume. Michael Servetus was put to death in this
city for heresy. A Savoyard attempt to reclaim this city, which they
had ruled through both temporal and spiritual positions, was defeated
in an incident called the Escalade. Napoleon called this city “the
city where they know English too well.” This city had an aristocratic
Council of (*) Twenty-Five that increasingly grew in power at the
expense of the General Council. This birthplace of Jean Jacques
Rousseau was annexed by the Directory to France, and after the
Napoleonic Wars, it joined its nearby cantons in confederation. For 10
points, name this Swiss city where John Calvin preached which sits by
a namesake lake on the border with France. resistance The product of
one form of this quantity and the junction depth j is plotted against
concentration on Irvin’s curves; that is its “sheet” form. This
quantity decreases when photons hit a cadmium sulfide cell. The
quantum of this quantity is equal to the ratio of Planck’s constant to
the square of the elementary charge, which is a constant named for von
Klitzing. This quantity is proportional to the (*) length and
inversely proportional to cross sectional area, and this quantity
times I squared gives the power radiated in Joule heating. The
derivative of voltage with respect to current gives this quantity,
according to the most general form of Ohm’s law.  For 10 points, name
this quantity measured in Ohms, the inverse of conductance. paladin
[or 12 Peers; or knights of Charlemagne before “Charlemagne”] One
member of this group is killed by an African prince, and his death is
avenged by Turpin. One member of this group owned an object whose name
means “high and neat” and contains a crystal on one side; that member
of this group split the head of his attacker in half before being
impaled by a spear. One member of this group is sent to defeat the
giant (*) Fierabras. One member of this group owned a weapon
containing the hair of Saint Denis, the blood of Saint Basil, and the
tooth of St. Peter. That member of this group is engaged to Aude and
dies after blowing his horn at the battle of Roncevaux Pass. For 10
points, name this group of 12 warriors that served Charlemagne, the
most notable of whom was Roland. Wystan Hugh Auden In one poem, this
author wrote of “A million eyes, a million boots in line” as part of
“An unintelligible multitude” among which there was “Nothing to eat
and nowhere to sit down.” That poem includes several stanzas
beginning, “She looked over his shoulder” and ends as “Thetis of the
shining breasts Cried out in dismay.” In another poem by this author,
the title figure “had everything necessary for the Modern Man”  and
“held the proper opinions for the time of year.” This author of “The
(*) Shield of Achilles” asks, “Was he free? Was he happy?” in a poem
about a man who “was found by the Bureau of Statistics to be One
against whom there was no official complaint.” Another poem by this
author declares, “About suffering they were never wrong, The old
Masters.” For 10 points, name this author of “The Unknown Citizen” and
“Musee des Beaux Arts.” Peninsular War [or Spanish Ulcer, Spanish
campaign, Spanish War of Independence, and Guerra de la Independencia
Espanola before “Spain” is read; prompt on “Napoleonic Wars” or “War
of the Nth Coalition”] During this conflict, the Division of the North
led by La Romana was evacuated from Denmark. Admiral Rosily was forced
to surrender his naval squadron during this conflict. During this
conflict, a king who would later be called “the Felon king” was driven
out of his kingdom despite granting the aggressor’s troops a right of
passage. Andé Masséna led a failed assault on the Lines of (*) Torres
Vedras, a key defensive position in this conflict. Joseph I was made
king during this conflict, but lost power when Ferdinand VII was
restored. The Battle of Salamanca was a key victory for the British
and their allies in this war, which first saw the use of the term
“guerilla warfare.” For 10 points, name this war won by the Duke of
Wellington against French forces in Portugal and Spain. Paul Klee This
artist drew a large white cross stretching the entire length of the
background of a lithograph titled  Tightrope Walker, and late in life
this artist painted a male and female in front of a brown background
studded with jewel-like colors in The Travelling Circus. A copper
etching by this artist shows a winged angel that was said to be the
image of the “angel of history” by Walter Benjamin, and this artist
also painted a group of (*) colored arches that appear to be marching.
This artist of Angelus Novus  and Viaducts Break Ranks wrote a
Pedagogical Sketchbook, and his notebooks collect his lectures on art
from the Bauhaus. Another work by this artist shows a pit under a wire
and crank, on which four birds are perched. For 10 points, name this
German-Swiss artist of Twittering Machine. Aroostook War [or Aroostock
War; or the Pork and Beans War; or Coon- Canuck War; Lumberjacks’ War;
or Northeastern boundary dispute] This incident was started by the
arrest of Rufus McIntyre, who was sent by the newly elected Governor
John Fairfield. During this incident, Lieutenant Governor John Harvey
negotiated a temporary truce before full negotiations started in this
event, which was partly caused by the building of Fort Blunder.
General (*) Winfield Scott helped negotiate the end of this event. The
cause of this incident had failed to be settled by an earlier
mediation attempt by William I of the Netherlands. The dispute that
caused this incident was resolved three years later by the Webster-
Ashburton Treaty. For 10 points, name this 1839 incident over the
location of the boundary between New Brunswick and Maine. integer
factorization [accept prime factorization] One algorithm for doing
this uses exponent vectors and bitwise adds the values of those
vectors mod 2; that algorithm, for some input n, multiplies squares
and their remainders mod n together to find a congruence of squares
mod n in a manner that improves upon Dixon’s method for doing this.
The period-finding sub-problem for this task is possible using a
superposition of states. The most efficient classical algorithm for
this is the (*) general number field sieve. However, a big-Oh of log n
cubed quantum algorithm for doing this named for Shor is fast enough
for very large products of primes, which would break RSA encryption.
For 10 points, name this procedure which, for a number of the form a
squared minus b squared results in a plus b and a minus b. China [or
Zhongguo] Jonathan Unger wrote a work about the transformation of
rural areas of this country. Mark Elvin once wrote that this country
had undergone a “high- level equilibrium trap” in which supply and
demand were balanced. One thinker stated that this country took a
“diffusionist” approach to science. The Needham question asks why this
nation fell behind other parts of the world in (*) scientific
development, even though they achieved many technological innovations
earlier. One sociological issue about this nation is the 4-2-1
problem, the creation of “leftover women” and the overindulged,
spoiled new generation, which is called “little emperor’s syndrome”.
For 10 points, name this nation which has suffered several demographic
changes due to its implementation of the one-child policy. fluorine
[or fluoride] An ion of this element is used as a masking agent when
performing an EDTA titration of a mixture of magnesium and aluminum. A
common inhibitor of serine proteases contains a phosphate group
attached to two isopropyl groups and an atom of this element. One
compound that contains 3 atoms of this element is used to cleave t-BOC
during solid-phase peptide synthesis. When this atom is added to the
alpha carbon of acetic acid, it significantly strengthens it via the
(*) inductive effect. A powerful Lewis acid is a compound of three
atoms of this element attached to boron. Four atoms of this element
are attached to the repeating element of Teflon, and an acid of this
element is used to etch glass. An ion of the element is commonly added
to drinking water.  For 10 points, name this most electronegative
element with atomic number 9 and symbol F. Shakespearean authorship
question [or who really wrote Shakespeare’s plays, the true person
behind Shakespeare, Shaksper isn’t Shakespeare, Shakespeare was a
front man and equivalents; or Baconian/  Oxfordian/Marlovian/Derbyian
theory of Shakespearean authorship; or less coherent answers such as
Shakespeare wasn’t Shakespeare] Descriptive answers acceptable. One
faction in this debate has a two-part theory whose second part claims
that one woman unknowingly produced a son through an incestesous
relationship with her son. Another faction in this debate advanced the
claim that the use of the Latin word honorificabilitudinitatibus was a
secret cipher. One faction in this debate interprets the line “our (*)
ever-living Poet” as posthumous praise. A common argument used by
factions in this debate is that the mainstream answer only attended a
grammar school, if at all. Popular solutions to this question include
the 6th Earl of Derby, the 17th Earl of Oxford, Francis Bacon and
Charles Marlowe. For 10 points, name this conspiratorial debate over
possible alternatives for the mainstream identification of the author
of plays such as Hamlet. Henri-Emile-Benoit Matisse This artist took
the title of one painting from the refrain of Baudelaire’s “Invitation
to a Voyage,” and that work is based on the landscape near Paul
Signac’s house. This artist was working on a sculpture but
accidentally broke it, which inspired him to paint that sculpture in a
very angular form that he called  Souvenir de Biskra. This artist of
Luxury, Serenity and Pleasure painted some (*)  Blue Nudes as well as
another work in which the tablecloth blends into the wallpaper behind
a maid who is arranging fruits on a table for the title Dessert. This
artist included one of his own works in the yellow background of a
multicolored scene filled with many nudes.  For 10 points, name this
artist of The Joy of Life and La Danse, the foremost painter of
fauvism. Augusto Jose Ramon Pinochet Ugarte Five of this man’s
bodyguards were killed by the FPMR in an assassination attempt, and
this man’s son was paid 3 million dollars for the Valmoval rifle
company, even though he didn’t own it. This man’s government is the
subject of the still-classified Rettig and Valech reports. This man’s
government killed journalist Charles Horman, and another person
targeted by his government was killed on D.C.s Embassy Row by a (*)
car bomb. This man, who used the Esmeralda  as a floating torture
chamber, was supported by the Carabineers during his rise. This man,
who employed the DINA secret police, came to power after his
predecessor was killed during the shelling of La Moneda palace; that
predecessor had completed the nationalization of his country’s Copper
mines and was named Salvador Allende. For 10 points, name this
longtime military dictator of Chile. Denis Diderot This author wrote
about the strange marriage of the hostess at the Inn of the Great
Stag, which came about because a vengeful widow tricked the Marquis of
Arcis to fall in love with a prostitute. Another work by this author
begins with the narrator watching the chess masters Legal and Philidor
before he gets into a conversation which ends with one man
proclaiming, “He who laughs last, laughs best.” This author set one
work in the (*) Regency Café, while another work is about a man who
believes that everything that happens or ever will happen has been
written on a great scroll up above. This man collaborated with Jean le
Rond d’Alembert on his most famous project, and he also wrote Jacques
the Fatalist and Rameau’s Nephew. For 10 points, name this
Enlightenment thinker who was the editor of a repository of all
knowledge, the Encyclopedie. James II of England [or James VII of
Scotland; or James the Shit; prompt on “Duke of York” and  “Duke of
Albany”] This ruler scandalously married Anne Hyde, the lowborn
daughter of a minister of his predecessor. After her death, this ruler
married Mary of Modena. This ruler was betrayed by the Immortal Seven.
One revolt against this ruler included a failed night attack led by
the guide Richard Godfrey; that revolt began at Lyme Regis and was
ended at the Battle of (*) Sedgemoor, when the forces of the Duke of
Monmouth were defeated.  Judge Jeffries then carried out the Bloody
Assizes during this ruler’s reign. This ruler passed multiple
Declarations of Indulgence to overturn such acts as the discriminatory
Test Acts. This ruler became known as “the shit” for fleeing from the
Battle of the Boyne, at which he was defeated by his successor,
William of Orange. For 10 points, name this last Roman Catholic ruler
of England, who was overthrown in the Glorious Revolution. Al-Ghazali
This man’s ideas were reflected in his student’s parable The Lion and
the Diver. This man used a parable of a water clock to outline the
role of judgment, decree, and predestination in his cosmology. One
book written by this man was divided into four parts, with the last
outlining paths to salvation; that work was re-published as The
Alchemy of Happiness.  One work by this man is arranged into a series
of 20 justifications, the 17th of which discusses the idea that God
(*) rearranges atoms in order to assign accidents to bodies.  In one
work, this man stated that demonstrations, or burhan, cannot
contradict revelation. This proponent of “secondary causality” was
criticized for putting God a step above the prime mover in a line-by-
line refutation by Averroes. For 10 points, name this philosopher who
critiqued the Aristotelian tradition of Arabic philosophy in his
Incoherence of the Philosophers. Aeschylus In one play by this author,
the title character’s first words are a speech that begins, “O divine
air Breezes on swift bird-wings… The multitudinous laughter of Mother
Earth!” One of this man’s plays was modified to include a Fourth
Episode involving a Herald who prohibits a certain action to better
segue into a play by a different author; that episode follows a
Threnos. The antagonist is told by his Spy of the title characters at
(*) Argos’ camp in one play by this author, who wrote of another
character telling the Oceanids about a marriage that could lead to
Zeus’s downfall after being trapped by Kratos and Bia. This author
wrote of the alliance against Eteocles as well as another character
who gets struck by lightning and has his liver eaten while he is
chained to a mountain. For 10 points, name this Greek tragedian behind
Seven Against Thebes and Prometheus Bound. scattering One equation
important to understand this process is derived by rearranging the
Schrodinger equation and then adding an i times epsilon term to a
denominator because E minus H sub zero is singular. One operator
important in understanding this process has poles corresponding to
bound states and maps in-states to out-states. One quantity important
in describing it can be found using the partial wave expansion, and in
this process the (*) incident waves are assumed to be plane waves in
the Born approximation. The square of the amplitude of this process
gives the magnitude of d sigma d omega. The hard-sphere variety of
this process has an angle-independent differential cross section. For
10 points, name this process in which a particle bounces off another
and changes direction. Solomon Asch One experiment performed by this
man and Ebenholz found that the order of things listed in free recall
doesn’t correlate with the order they were learned. This man showed
that the perception of “warm” and  “cold” traits can influence the
interpretation of other traits in his theory of impression formation.
This man showed that students respond differently depending on whether
Jefferson or (*) Lenin is put forth as the source of a quotation about
rebellion, which is an example of prestige suggestion. One experiment
performed by this man placed the subject among a group of confederates
to test social influence. For 10 points, name this psychologist who
performed an experiment asking people which of three lines matched
another to demonstrate conformity. enthalpy In the Peng-Robinson
equation, the departure function for this quantity is equal to R times
critical temperature times a function of the compressibility factor.
The change in this quantity is divided by negative 2kt in the
exponential of the expression giving the density of Schottky defects
in a crystal. Both this quantity and the mass flow rate are held
constant along a Fanno line. When a gas is forced through an
insulated, porus plug, this quantity is held constant. For an ideal
solution, the (*) change in this quantity upon solvation is zero. This
quantity, which is held constant during a Joule-Thomson process, is
equal to the internal energy plus pressure times volume. The fact that
this quantity is a state function leads to Hess’ Law. The change in
this quantity determines whether a reaction is endo or exothermic. For
10 points, name this quantity symbolized H. instability [accept
anything saying that the system is unstable] Long, thin elliptical
galaxies suffer from the “firehose” type of this phenomenon. Stars
that appear on a feature of the H-R diagram with this in the name
contain doubly-ionized helium in their atmospheres.  Orbits near fixed
points in systems of linear differential equations have this property
the eigenvalues of the associated matrix have real parts greater than
zero. This word names a (*) “strip” in the HR diagram that contains
variable stars. This condition also occurs when the second derivative
of the potential energy is less than zero for a system with no net
forces or torques. For 10 points, name this property of a system,
which is also used to describe an equilibrium that is not resistant to
perturbation. Beethoven’s Symphony No. 6 in F major, Opus 68 [accept
Pastoral Symphony before mentioned] This piece’s F minor fourth
movement begins with two bars of tremolo Ds in the low strings before
the second violin enters with a series of pianissimo staccato eighths;
that movement is the only one with a timpani part. The composer of
this piece included a brief description in the program, which called
this piece “more of an expression of feeling than a painting.” This
piece, despite its number, was the (*) first in the program of a
concert at the Theater an der Wien where its composer also premiered
his previous work of the same type.  This piece uses winds to
represent birds, while its fourth movement “Thunderstorm” separates a
“Merry gathering of country people” and a “Shepherds’ song.” For 10
points, name this work by Beethoven that is often called  “Pastoral.”
GABA [or gamma-aminobutyric acid or gamma-aminobutyrate] An overdose
of an agonist of this compound’s receptors can be reversed using
flumazenil. This compound’s A receptors are blocked by picrotoxin, and
those A receptors have two alpha, two beta, and one gamma subunit.
This compound is broken down to succinic semialdehyde. Activators of
this compound’s receptors are used to treat delirium tremens, which
occurs during alcohol withdrawal. This compound is produced by a
namesake (*) shunt that depends on a PLP-cofactor-using enzyme.
Baclofen is an agonist of this compounds receptors used to treat
spasticity. This compound is formed from the decarboxylation of
glutamate and its effects are allosterically enhanced using
benzodiazepines. For 10 points, name this inhibitory neurotransmitter.
Federico Fellini In one film by this director, a series of frescoes
are destroyed when exposed to fresh air during subway construction.
That work, which also contains an ecclesiastical fashion show, is a
semi-autobiographical film about this director’s journey to the title
city. He directed a film in which the main character sees a huge pig
stuffed with birds and sausages cut open at a feast hosted by (*)
Trimalchio. Another of this director’s films opens with a scene in
which the protagonist fails to get phone numbers from sunbathers while
onboard a helicopter carrying a Christ statue. In that film by this
director, Marcello joins Paparazzo to cover the arrival of Swedish-
American actress Sylvia, with whom Marcello later dances in the Trevi
Fountain. For 10 points, name this Italian director of Roma,
Satyricon,  and La Dolce Vita. Imperial Germany and the Russian Empire
[or Second Reich and Imperial Russia; or Deutsches Reich and
Rossiyaskaya Imperiya; or any stupid combination of the above] A
failed attempt to create an alliance between these two nations was the
Treaty of Bjorko, which was signed during a war in which one of these
nations provided coaling stations for the other’s fleet. Relations
between two countries improved with the signing of the Reinsurance
Treaty, which was not renewed three years later. The leader of one of
these countries held a (*) congress in his capital that reduced the
gains that the other country had made in the Treaty of San Stefano.
These two countries joined Austria-Hungary in the League of the Three
Emperors. For 10 points, name these two countries, once led by the
authors of the Willy-Nicky Telegrams between Wilhelm II and Nicholas
II. Matthew Arnold This poet wrote, “Yes, thou art gone! and round me
too the night / In ever nearing circle weaves her shade,” in a poem
with an epigraph from Lucretius that tells how “all our hustling
morrows only make /  The smooth to-day of God.” This poet emphasized
the line, “The bloom is gone, and with the bloom go I,” in a poem
whose title character is told, “Time, not Corydon, hath conquer’d
thee.” This poet began one poem,  “How changed is here each spot man
makes or fills!” and in another poem described, “the (*) night-wind
down the vast edges dread And naked shingles of the world.” This poet
commemorated his friend Arthur Hugh Clough in one poem, and he wrote
about “The eternal note of sadness” heard at a place where “ignorant
armies clash by night.” For 10 points, name this author of “Thyrsis”
and “Dover Beach.” Ignatius One figure of this name wrote a letter on
the way to his execution in Rome urging his people to let him die
because there are no worldly things left for him. One figure of this
name was influenced heavily by his reading of Ludolph of Saxony’s De
Vita Christi. With Clement of Rome and Polycarp of Smyrna, another
figure with this name is one of the named Apostolic Fathers of the
Church and called himself (*) theophoros.  Another figure with this
name was the first to hold the position of Superior General, and one
of his works is divided into four “weeks” and teaches people how to
develop the ability to discern between God and Satan; that work is a
guide to meditation called the Spiritual Exercises.  For 10 points,
give this common name of the third Bishop of Antioch and a theologian
from Loyola who founded the Jesuits. Healing [or medicine; or health;
or surgery; or doctors; or surgeons] Besides being responsible for
maize and dancing, the Aztec god Ixtilton was in charge of this
domain.  Cit-Bolon-Tum is a god of this domain in Mayan mythology.
Another god of this domain attacked his son Miach four times for
aiding King Nuada; that Celtic god is Dia’necht. Iron Crutch Li of the
Eight Immortals had powers associated with gods of this domain when he
let people drink from his gourd. A Greek god of this domain had a huge
(*) sanctuary at Epidaurus and a son called Machaon. That Greek god of
this domain was the son of Koronis and Apollo and was killed by Zeus’s
thunderbolt since his skill had grown so powerful that he was
depopulating the underworld. For 10 points, name this domain of gods
such as Asclepius, who was helpful in avoiding sickness and death.
indifference curves The price offer curve is constructed from a set of
points tangent to these curves, and the contact curve goes through the
points at which two of these curves are tangent to each other. The
marginal rate of substitution is equal to the negative of the slope of
these curves, and they are drawn with respect to the bottom left and
top right of an (*) Edgeworth Box. These curves, which give the level
curves of the utility function, are L shaped in the case of perfect
complements, but they are usually convex. A standard type of
optimization problem gives a point on one of these curves tangent to a
given budget line. For 10 points, name these curves that show the
bundles of goods over which an agent has no preference. Honore de
Balzac This author created a man who visits his uncle with a huge set
of hunting gear and a private letter that declares his father’s
bankruptcy and explains that he plans to commit suicide. Later in that
novel, Charles gets a loan for his trading business from a woman to
whom he gives a gold cabinet, though that woman returns the cabinet
and marries a Cruchot. This author wrote of a middle-aged spinster who
finally falls for Wenceslas Steinbock, only to see him get married to
(*) Hortense Hulot. At the end of another novel by this man, two paid
mourners and a servant are the only other people at the title
vermicelli maker’s funeral other than Eugene de Rastignac. This author
of Cousin Bette wrote a work with sections titled “Scenes from
provincial life” and  “Scenes from private life.” For 10 points, name
this author who included le Pere Goriot in his La Comedie humaine. The
Iceman Cometh One character in this play is woken up to see the
“Revolution,” but that character just starts singing the Carmagnole;
at the end of the play, that character again sings the Carmagnole
after a different man calls the police on himself, which causes Moran
and Lieb to arrest him. Another character in this play commits suicide
by jumping off a fire escape after being told to do so repeatedly, and
some girls decide that if they are whores then (*) Rocky must be a
pimp, which causes Rocky to slap Pearl and Margie, two of his “tarts.”
In this play, the mother of Don Parritt was once a lover of Larry
Slade who keeps himself detached from the drunken antics of the other
characters. For 10 points, name this play in which Hickey attacks the
pipe dreams of the other people in Harry Hope’s saloon, which was
created by Eugene O’Neill. horses [or Equus Ferus Caballus; or ma
before “Chollima”] A humanoid monster that resembles this animal in
the mythology of the Philippines is the Tikbalang.  In Korean
mythology, the Chollima is one of these animals.  In Chinese
mythology, the third son of the Dragon King of the West Sea is best
known for taking a white-colored form of this animal and is called the
Bailongma. Some of these animals owned by Rhesus are stolen in the (*)
Doloneia. Peleus and Thetis got two talking examples of these animals
at their wedding. The Iliad describes many heroes, but most notably
Hector, as a “breaker” of these animals that include Balius and
Xanthus. In a story from Norse myth, a ploy to delay some construction
work at Asgard leads to Loki giving birth to one of these animals. For
10 points, name these this species that includes Odin’s eight-legged
Sleipnir and Bellerophon’s winged Pegasus. Parsifal The prelude to
this opera begins with a three beat pickup as the double reeds and
strings play a slow A flat arpeggio to begin the love feast motif.
Because of the confusion at the premiere of this “Stage consecrating
festival play,” some audiences do not applaud after the first act. In
a climactic scene, one character exclaims his desire to die in “Mein
Vater! Hochgesegenter der Helden!” The Dresden Amen is used for the
Good Friday Spell and another motif in this work, which tells of how a
young boy (*) shoots down a swan in Monsalvat. Kundry tries to seduce
the title character who resists, and then, when Klingsor tries to kill
him, he catches the Holy Spear. For 10 points, name this opera about a
knight who heals Amfortas’s wound and uncovers the Holy Grail,
composed by Richard Wagner. Dallas, Texas This city’s Union Bankers
Building was the site of a Knights of Pythias temple designed by
William Sidney Pittman and is located in one of its art districts,
Deep Ellum. Lakes in this city include Bachman Lake and White Rock
Lake. This city is the site of the Reunion Tower and it lies on the
Trinity River, which isn’t navigable to an ocean. One of this city’s
two largest airports is the largest hub for (*) American Airlines,
which is the sponsor of the sports arena that contains this city’s
hockey and basketball teams, and the other, Love Field, is the
corporate HQ of Southwest Airlines. It is the larger of the two cities
in the Metroplex; the other is Fort Worth. This city is the site of a
Philip Johnson-designed John F. Kennedy Memorial. For 10 points, name
this 3rd largest city in Texas after Houston and San Antonio, home to
sports teams such as the NHL’s Stars and the NFL’s Cowboys. power The
autocorrelation function is related by the Fourier transform to the
spectral density of this quantity according to the Weiner-Kinchin
theorem. In the relativistic limit, this quantity is proportional to
the sixth power of the Lorentz gamma. One formula giving this quantity
is integrated between two time periods in order to give the magnitude
of the radiation reaction, and states that it is proportional to
charge squared times acceleration squared. Those expressions are named
for Lienard and (*) Larmor. Equating the input and output value of
this quantity is used to derive the mechanical advantage. This
quantity is given by the integral of the dot product of force and
velocity, or the derivative of work with respect to time. For 10
points, name this quantity measured in watts. Henry Fuseli This artist
left an unfinished portrait of Anna Landolt on the back of one of his
canvases; that work had a later version with an erotic sculpture of a
man and a woman on the table that previously held only a mirror, book,
and vial. In another work, the ghostly title figure raises her finger
to her lips to hush a man who is yielding his weapons in (*) Lady
Macbeth Seizing the Daggers. This artist depicted a man sitting cross-
legged with his long hair falling down into his lap in his Silence,
while another work includes red curtains in the background, from which
a demonic horse’s head emerges. For 10 points, name this Swiss-born
creator of a painting that shows an incubus sitting on a white-clad
sleeping woman, titled The Nightmare. interpolation [prompt on
“approximation” or “approximating a function”] Shepard’s method is a
multivariate form of this technique which uses inverse-distance
weighting. Band-limited functions can be constructed as a sum of sinc
(“sink”) functions using the Whittaker-Shannon formula for doing this.
Hermite’s method of doing this incorporates derivatives. Chebyshev
nodes are used alongside one method of doing this, which suffers from
an oscillatory phenomenon around the interval (*) endpoints; that is
Runge’s phenomenon. That occurs when using polynomials for this
purpose, but can be avoided by using piecewise functions with smooth
knots, known as splines. For 10 points, name this mathematical
technique in which additional points are created inside the bounds of
a known set of data points, often contrasted with extrapolation.
“Second Treatise of Government”  [prompt on “Two Treatises of
Government”] This work states that a justified conqueror has dominion
over those that opposed him, but not those who didn’t. One section of
this work quotes Richard Hooker at length to talk about the maxims of
justice and charity. This work cites the example of a man eating from
an apple tree to show that labor is what distinguishing common (*)
goods from private goods. This work was a follow-up to a work which
refuted Robert Filmer’s Patriarcha, and states that humanity begins in
a state of perfect equality until conflicts over property arise.  Its
last section discusses how repeated abuses and the breach of trust can
lead to the dissolution of government, which supposedly inspired the
American Revolution. For 10 points, name this 1689 work of political
philosophy by John Locke. John Milton This poet wrote of “The melting
voice through mazes running; Untwisting all the chains that ty The
hidden soul of harmony,” while another of this author’s narrators
wants to “Find out the peacefull hermitage, The Hairy Gown and Mossy
Cell.” This author wrote of a “half regain’d Eurydice” before stating,
“Mirth with thee, I mean to live.” In a poem, this author wrote of
“that one Talent… Lodged with me useless” and closed with the line,
“They also (*) serve who only stand and wait.” This author wrote a
pair of poems beginning with the lines, “Hence loathed Melancholy,”
and, “Hence vain deluding joys,” about a happy and thoughtful person,
respectively, and one of his sonnets begins, “When I consider how my
light is spent.” For 10  points, name this author of poems like “Il
Penseroso,” “L’Allegro,” and the sonnet “On His Blindness” as well as
Paradise Lost. mercury [or Hg] A mixture of potassium hydroxide and
this element’s tetra-iodo form is used in a reagent used to detect
ammonia, named for Nessler. A chloride of this element is the primary
component of the saturated calomel electrode. A compound of this
element and zinc is used in a gentle acid-medium reduction commonly
applied after a Friedel-Crafts acylation. This element’s dimethyl form
was formerly used as an (*) NMR standard, and is known for seeping
through the latex glove of Karen Wetterhan. The acetate of this
element is used in a reaction to add an alcohol to an alkene in a
Markovnikov fashion. This element, which is extracted from the ore
cinnabar, is widely used in the preservative thimerosal. For 10
points, name this element formerly known as quicksilver, which is
highly poisonous. ATP synthase [accept Complex V] This protein’s
C-subunits consists of a GXGXGXG motif important for helix packing.
One section of this protein is named for its sensitivity to
oligomycin. One domain of this protein is a hexamer containing 3  sets
of alternating alpha and beta subunits. The mechanism of this protein
was solved by affixing it to a glass plate and attaching a fluorescent
actin molecule; that experiment revealed that its (*) F1 domain
rotates by 120  degrees while its F-oh base piece is transmembrane.
This protein is central to Mitchell’s chemiosmotic hypothesis, and is
found in the inner mitochondrial membrane. For 10 points, name this
rotor-shaped protein that converts proton gradients created by the
electron transport chain into ATP. Battle of Kadesh [or Battle of
Qadesh] This battle’s traditional chronology was made in 1903 by James
Henry Breasted. “The Official Report or Bulletin” described this
battle in which Sherden bodyguards protected a leader saved by the
Nearin division’s arrival. Before this battle, two fake Shoshu
deserters lied to one side’s leader that the enemy army was in Aleppo,
when they were already by the namesake city on the (*) Orontes River.
This battle was described in records at Hattusa and Karnak and
involved one leader who only used chariots to attack the isolated Ra
division.  About sixteen years after Muwatallis II fought in this
battle, his successors agreed to the oldest surviving written
international treaty. For 10 points, name this 1274 BCE battle between
the Hittites and Egyptian forces under Ramses II. Anne of Green Gables
[or Anne Shirley; or Anne Blythe; or Anne of Avonlea, Anne of the
Island, Anne of Windy Poplars, or Anne of Ingleside; or Anne Shirley;
or Mrs. Gilbert Blythe until “Gilbert” and prompt afterwards; prompt
on “Blythe” until “Gilbert” is read; prompt on “Shirley”] This
character wins the respect of a family by uncovering its prominent
ancestor’s cannibalism. She stays at Patty’s Place to study at Redmond
College, for which she won the Avery Scholarship. This character seeks
to make friends with “kindred spirits” and she co-named Lover’s Lane
with Diana Barry, one of her  “bosom friends.” She spurns the apology
of the boy who rescued her from a reenactment of Elaine’s death
because he had called her (*) “carrots” at a school where she would
later teach. After reaching her “Book of Revelation,” this character
agrees to marry Gilbert Blythe, whom she met shortly after Maria
Cuthbert took her into her Avonlea home on Prince Edward Island. For
10 points, name this red-haired, orphan girl, created by Lucy Maud
Montgomery, who lives at Green Gables. Elbridge Gerry A biography of
this man was written by his son-in-law James T. Austin. This man was
kicked out of his state’s constitutional convention after getting into
a shouting match by Francis Dana. Like George Mason and Edmund
Randolph, this man refused to sign the US Constitution at the
Constitutional Convention. One action he signed off on inspired an
Elkanah Tisdale cartoon showing his state gripped by a (*) dragon.
With CC Pinckney and John Marshall, this man was one of the three
diplomats approached by agents of Talleyrand for a bribe as part of
the XYZ affair. This man was the second vice president under James
Madison. For 10 points, name this Governor of Massachusetts, whose
attempted reshaping of Essex County led to the coining of a
portmanteau of his name and “salamander” to describe electoral
redistricting. France One theologian from this country wrote an
apocryphal history in which the crucifixion of Jesus took place during
the life of Alexander the Great, called the Alexandreis. One
theologian that held a university post in this country was known as
Doctor Irrefragibilis and standardized the use of Peter Lombard’s
Sentences  by dividing it into distinctions. Another theologian based
here is the patron of beekeepers and heavily influenced an order that
returned to strict (*) Benedictine rule; that order, founded in this
country, was the Cistercians. Another writer from this country
attacked the casuistry of the Jesuits and supported Jansenism in his
Provincial Letters.  For 10 points, name this country, the home of
Walter of Chatillon, Alexander of Hales, Bernard of Clairvaux and a
writer who set up a namesake “wager” for believing in God, Blaise
Pascal. Harry S. Truman This president fired J. Howard McGrath as
attorney general when McGrath fired a special prosecutor who was
investigating corruption in this president’s administration. The
Former Presidents Act was primarily passed to benefit this politician,
who was the target of an assassination attempt made at Blair House.
This president was first elected with the help of the (*) Pendergast
machine. He led a namesake Senate committee that exposed fraud and
waste in military contracts awarded during the Second World War. He
denounced his successor for failing to denounce McCarthy and he
endorsed Adlai E. Stevenson to succeed him. For 10 points, name this
president who surprisingly defeated Dewey in the 1948 presidential
election and chose not to contest the 1952  presidential election won
by Eisenhower. cosine A spherical harmonic can be decomposed into N
times an exponential times the associated Legendre polynomial of THIS
function. The wavelength shift in Compton scattering is equal to the
Compton wavelength times one minus this function. The square of this
function appears multiplied by the incident intensity to give the
emitted intensity of a polarizer in (*) Malus’ Law. This function
appears on the top left and the bottom right entry on the standard 2
by 2 rotation matrix. For a block on an incline, this function
multiplied by the force of gravity gives the magnitude of the normal
force. For two vectors, the dot product is equal to their magnitude
multiplied by this function of the angle between them. For 10 points,
name this function which is also used to find the x-component of a
given vector. Mamluks [or Mamelukes; prompt on “Egyptians”; prompt on
“Ottomans” or “Turks” or “Ottoman Turks”] One polity controlled by
these people was defeated at the Battle of Dongola, who had earlier
taken the land from the Funj Sultanate. Before a battle in which these
people lost, the opposing general apocryphally said,  “forty centuries
look down upon you” to rally his troops and defeat the forces of Murad
and Ibrahim Bey.  An (*) Albanian mercenary seized power by tricking
the leaders of this people into trap during the Massacre of the
Citadel; that ruler was Muhammad Ali. Another leader of these people,
Qutuz, won the Battle of Ain Jalut against the Mongols, but was
overthrown by another leader of these people called Baibars. For 10
points, name these former rules of Egypt who were descended from
Turkish slaves. Rhinoceros After ordering a drink, one character in
this play is derided for day- dreaming, to which he responds that
“Life is a dream;” that character is kissing his love interest when
the telephone rings and they hear only trumpeting, which shows that
the radio station has been taken over. Another character in this play
keeps lecturing about will power and is one of the highly rational
characters along with a man who does a bad job of explaining (*)
syllogisms to an Old Gentleman. A woman in this play excuses her
husband from work for an illness before that husband crushes a
staircase; despite all this, Mrs. Boeuf refuses to abandon him. Near
the end of this play, Dudard goes outside which causes his demise, and
then Daisy breaks up with the protagonist. For 10  points, name this
play in which Berenger doesn’t transform into one of the title animals
written by Eugene Ionesco. Venus de Milo [or Aphrodite of Melos] This
work inspired a series of multicolored copies by Jim Dine. The
placement and lighting on this work was criticized by Robert Ingersoll
Aitkin in a controversial article, while Pierre-Auguste Renoir called
it  “A big gendarme.” A depiction of this work with pompom-attached
drawers was created by Salvador Dali, who also put 28 (*) copies of it
into the Hallucinogenic Toreador. The artist originally wrote a long
inscription on the now-lost plinth of this work, which was discovered
by a farmer. This statue was theorized to originally contain a shield
resting against the subject’s thigh, which may explain its S-curve
shape. It is currently attributed to Alexandros of Antioch but was
originally attributed to Praxiteles. For 10 points, name this Greek
statue currently housed in the Louvre of a woman with no arms. John
Searle Adapting an idea from G.E.M Anscombe, this thinker
distinguished between brute facts and institutional facts to posit a
theory of society. He argued that deconstructionism was characterized
by deliberate obscurantism in his essay “Reiterating the Differences,”
which prompted a reply from Derrida in the book  Limited Inc. This
author of The Construction (*) of Social Reality refined J.L. Austin’s
theory of discourse with indirect speech acts. Ned Block proposed the
Systems Reply to another of this man’s ideas.  In his paper “Minds,
Brains, and Programs” he provided an argument against Strong AI by
imagining strips of paper being put under a door that are either
translated by a human or a machine. For 10 points, name this
philosopher who formulated the Chinese Room argument. Thomas Stearns
Eliot This author wrote how “Rachel née Rabinovitch Tears at the
grapes with murderous paws” and “She and the lady in the cape Are
suspect, thought to be in league” while the title male is “Outside the
window, leaning in” with “Branches of wistaria” around him. Another of
this author’s poems describes an “Unreal City Under the brown fog of a
winter dawn,” then “of a winter noon.” That poem’s (*) fourth and
shortest section asks “Gentile or Jew” to “Consider Phlebas, who was
once handsome and tall as you.” This author described the “zebra
stripes along [a] jaw Swelling to maculate giraffe” in a poem about an
“Apeneck” man in his “Sweeney among the Nightingales” and wrote the
refrain, “HURRY UP PLEASE IT’S TIME” towards the end of a poem whose
final three words are all “shantih.” For 10 points, name this author
of The Waste Land. overpopulation [accept reasonable equivalents,
including “crowding”] John B. Calhoun developed the “behavioral sink”
to address this issue. A work by Virginia Abernathy about the politics
of this issue posits the hypothesis that economic opportunity can
alleviate it. John McCabe called one author of a book about this issue
“worse than Hitler” in a review. The author of one work about this
issue famously lost a wager to Julian Simon over the price of certain
metals. One work about this issue discusses how UDC’s have (*) “rising
expectations”, and criticizes the Vatican for playing “roulette”.
Another work about this issue states that it may be stopped by
voluntary moral restraint, war, and disease, and plots an exponential
curve. For 10 points, name this issue, the subject of a book titled
after a certain “Bomb” by Paul Erlich and most famously addressed in
an essay by Thomas Malthus. The House of the Seven Gables One
character in this work summons three spirits, one of whom starts to
cough blood after the other two spirits hold their hands over his
mouth. Those spirits are summoned after the young girl Alice is
hypnotized with the consent of her father, Gervayse, but that hypnosis
ends with Alice getting pneumonia and dying.  Another character in
this novel framed his cousin for a murder, earning that cousin (*)
thirty years in jail; that character is a judge who dies while sitting
upright in a chair. A deed to a large plot of land in Maine is lost in
this novel as part of a curse that was started generations ago by
Matthew Maule when he was hanged by the Colonel. At the end of this
novel, Holgrave and Phoebe declare their love for each other, and they
join Clifford and Hepzibah in leaving the title estate. For 10 points,
name this novel about the Pyncheon family by Nathaniel Hawthorne.
compilation [or compiling; accept compilers; prompt on “assembling” or
“assemblers”; prompt on  “optimization” until “Bootstrapping” is read]
One optional part of this process combines known operands into static
forms; that process, known as constant folding, is often combined with
constant propagation to replace known variables. For unchanging
expressions with no side effects, this process can utilize loop
invariant code motion and strength reduction and it can also reduce
branching through another technique. (*) Bootstrapping is a term for
writing certain types of programs that do this. Later stages of this
process include register allocation and instruction selection, and a
common optimization for it is loop unrolling. Examples of programs
that do this process are clang, gcc, and javac.  For 10 points, name
this process that usually converts high-level source code to low-level
machine code. {Siddharta} Gautama [accept {Buddha} before Buddhism]
This figure’s son once told him that even his shadow is pleasing to
him while asking for his inheritance.  Assassination attempts on this
man include one in which a boulder was rolled at him, but it only
grazed his foot. He was given a name meaning “he who achieves his
goal”. This figure is said to have been born next to a sal tree while
his mother was travelling to her seclusion. This man converted and
preached to his companions known as the Sangha, and preached to them
in the Deer (*) Park. This man preached a path between asceticism and
indulgence he called “the Middle Way”. He outlined the existence,
origin, stopping, and path to stopping dukkha, or suffering, as the
Four Noble Truths. For 10 points, name this Indian prince and founder
of Buddhism. blood In Hinduism, the Vaitarna usually contains this
substance, and a demon partly named for this substance was the
companion of Sumbha and Nishumbha. In the Kalevala, this substance
appearing on a comb foretold the death of Lemminkainen. The demon
Raktavija used this substance to self-replicate, and in Norse myth it
was mixed with ashes and honey to form the (*) Mead of Poetry. The
giant Talos and the Olympian gods had ichor instead of this substance.
A shirt covered with poison and this substance was given by Deianeira
to Heracles, resulting in his death; that shirt had been tainted by
the centaur Nessus. For 10 points, name this substance, with is
required by vampires for sustenance. skeletal muscle [prompt on
partial answer, prompt on “striated muscle” since cardiac muscle is
also striated] Inflammatory conditions of this tissue are associated
with anti-Jo1 and anti-SRP antibodies. Another condition in this
tissue is caused by mutations in TPM3 and shows nemaline bodies.
Coenzyme Q is used to prevent a horrific side effect of statins in
which this tissue degrades. CPK is commonly elevated in conditions
affecting it. This tissue lacks glucose-6-phosphatase, which is why
the (*) glycogen they store cannot be transferred. In the Cori cycle,
this organ receives glucose from the liver. This tissue atrophies upon
denervation, and another disease of this tissue is caused by mutations
in dystrophin. This tissue, which receives signals via nicotinic
acetylcholine receptors, contains myofibrils, which can be subdivided
further into repeating units called sarcomeres.  For 10 points, name
this type of tissue which is responsible for voluntary movement. One
Thousand and One Nights [or Arabian Nights; or Kitab alf laylah wa-
laylah] This collection describes a man who dies choking on a fishbone
and is carried to the top of a staircase where a doctor causes the
body to fall and mistakenly believes himself to be responsible for
murder; that story about a hunchbacked jester is followed by two
related stories about a barber’s fifth and sixth brothers.  This
collection tells of a man who, after discovering that his wife’s
infidelity, executes her and marries a series of women, all of whom he
(*) executes after their first day together. One character in this
collection finds that trees have started to grow on the back of a
sleeping whale, while the frame story is about Shahryar who postpones
the execution of the Vizier’s daughter, Scheherazade, as she tells the
stories in this collection. For 10 points, name this collection that
describes “The Seven Voyages of Sinbad the Sailor” and also tells of
“Aladdin and the Wonderful Lamp.” 18\. One of this organization’s web
pages was defaced with text that included the phrase “the point in the
entire global population is supporting you. NOBODY!” by a group called
BMPocWE. This organization’s Ladee mission began on This collection
describes a man who dies choking on a fishbone and is carried to the
top of a staircase where a doctor causes the body to fall and
mistakenly believes himself to be responsible for murder; that story
about a hunchbacked jester is followed by two related stories about a
barber’s fifth and sixth brothers.  This collection tells of a man
who, after discovering that his wife’s infidelity, executes her and
marries a series of women, all of whom he (*) executes after their
first day together. One character in this collection finds that trees
have started to grow on the back of a sleeping whale, while the frame
story is about Shahryar who postpones the execution of the Vizier’s
daughter, Scheherazade, as she tells the stories in this collection.
For 10 points, name this collection that describes “The Seven Voyages
of Sinbad the Sailor” and also tells of “Aladdin and the Wonderful
Lamp.” flowers [prompt on “plants”, accept more specific answers] In
Greek mythology, the lover of Smilax was turned into one of these
things. In Japanese mythology, the reason that humans have short
lifespans is because Ninigi married the princess of these things,
rather than the princess of rocks. In Aztec mythology, a goddess
associated with these things was followed by a retinue of birds and
butterflies, and was once (*) kidnapped by Tezcatlipoca. Kama’s arrows
were tipped with these things, and the Aztec gods Xochipilli and
Xochiquetzal were associated with them. After being gored to death,
Adonis’  blood fell to the ground and created one of these things, as
did a boy loved by Apollo and Zephyrus who was struck by a discus. For
10 points, name this type of plant associated with Hyacinthus. The
Alchemist At the end of this play, we are told that one character will
use his “pelf” to “feast you often, and invite new guests,” referring
to the audience in the theater. In another scene, a character plays
the cittern offstage to signify the arrival of elves to a blindfolded
man; in reality, two men are pinching him and telling him to throw his
possessions to the floor on the order of the Queen of Fairy. The
master of the central household had originally fled the (*) plague but
when he returns, his butler must return to his old persona of Jeremy.
Some of the  “gulls” in this play include Kastril, the brother of the
widowed Dame Pliant, the law clerk Dapper, and a tobacco seller named
Drugger. Those characters are conned by the prostitute Dol Common and
Captain Face. For 10 points, name this play in which Subtle pretends
to have the philosopher’s stone, by Ben Jonson. Steppenwolf [or Der
Steppenwolf] The protagonist of this novel encounters a man who says,
“I am not anybody,” and, “We have no names here,” after which he
explains how to build up a personality from the chess pieces that
moved themselves on the board; that takes place after the protagonist
sees a bunch of armored cars chasing and killing pedestrians.  A sign-
bearer in this novel gives the protagonist a (*) “Treatise” on himself
which explains that he will commit suicide on his fiftieth birthday
despite his ability to be an “Immortal.” Mozart appears to admonish
the protagonist after he finds a knife in his pocket that he uses to
kill the companion of the saxophonist Pablo, a woman named Hermine;
that occurs in the “Magic Theater.” For 10 points, name this novel
about the half-animalistic nature of Harry Haller written by Hermann
Hesse. Acts of the Apostles In a scene in this book, the sons of Sceva
are beaten to a bloody pulp by a demonic man. Later in it, the corrupt
governor Felix expects a bribe from a prisoner; that prisoner is later
put on trial by the more responsible governor Festus. This book
contains a scene where a man notices an altar with the inscription
“TO A GOD UNKNOWN” while walking around Mars Hill at Athens. Its final
chapters describe a man sailing to (*) Rome for his trial, only to be
shipwrecked on Malta. Earlier in this book, that man is blinded while
on the road to Damascus. This book begins with the Holy Spirit’s
arrival at Pentecost and later chronicles the conversion of Saint
Paul. For 10 points, name this book describing the founding of the
early Christian church, a New Testament text that follows the Gospels.
Vector potential The commutator of this quantity with momentum appears
in the operator for dipole transition matrix elements. The inverse
Fourier transform of this function is used to derive the Darwin
interaction term in the Lagrangian for a particle in a field. This
quantity is equal to a constant times an integral of the current
density over volume in the definition of retarded potentials. The
importance of this quantity was shown in an experiment in which a beam
of electrons were split while travelling (*) around a solenoid,
causing them to acquire a 180 degree phase shift named for Berry. This
quantity, which is added to the gradient of an arbitrary function in a
gauge transformation, was shown to have physical relevance by the
Aharonov-Bohm effect. For 10  points, name this quantity symbolized A,
whose curl gives the magnetic field. Scipio Africanus the Elder [or
Scipio Africanus Major; or Publius Cornelius Scipio Africanus; prompt
on “Scipio”] This general made a brilliant nighttime attack against
enemy tents to break up a coalition force besieging him at Utica. This
general served as legate during his brother Lucius’s campaign against
Antiochus III of Syria. His victory at Baecula prompted the losing
commander at that battle to launch a failed attempt to link up with
his brother’s forces. This general used heavier flanks to execute a
“reverse (*) Cannae” maneuver at the Battle of Illipa in Spain. This
general saved his father’s life at the Battle of Lake Ticinus. In his
most famous battle, he opened up his ranks to neutralize the effect of
the Carthaginian Elephant Corps. For 10 points, name this Roman
general who won the Battle of Zama by defeating Hannibal and thus
ended the Second Punic War. Trial of John Peter Zenger One figure
involved in this case was given a five-and-a-half ounce gold box for
his role and was referred to as “the day-star” of the revolution by
one official. The defense stated that the law in question had its
origins in the Star Chamber, and appealed to the jury to use their
daily lives to determine whether the defendant was telling the truth.
The accused in this case had taken issue with the replacement of Chief
Justice Lewis (*) Morris by James DeLancey, as enacted by governor
William Cosby, and published a series of articles in the New-York
Weekly Journal. For 10 points, name this event in the colonial United
States in which a namesake newspaperman was sued for libel. 10\. This
artist made a yellow tinted work showing a seated young girl on the
One figure involved in this case was given a five-and-a-half ounce
gold box for his role and was referred to as “the day-star” of the
revolution by one official. The defense stated that the law in
question had its origins in the Star Chamber, and appealed to the jury
to use their daily lives to determine whether the defendant was
telling the truth. The accused in this case had taken issue with the
replacement of Chief Justice Lewis (*) Morris by James DeLancey, as
enacted by governor William Cosby, and published a series of articles
in the New-York Weekly Journal. For 10 points, name this event in the
colonial United States in which a namesake newspaperman was sued for
libel. rod [accept cylindrical; accept filamentous before the world
“intermediate”] The vinculin binding site of talin is a C-terminal
helical bundle named for its taking of this shape. Hirano bodies in
Alzheimer’s disease take this shape. Acute promyelocytic leukemia
shows inclusions of this shape named for Auer. This is the name and
shape taken by the central helix-rich domain of an intermediate
filament that forms (*) coiled-coil dimers. One organism that takes
this shape secretes the lethal factor and edema factor, while another
one is responsible for the self-limiting diarrhea caused by eating
unclean reheated rice. A cell named for this shape has a peak
sensitivity at 498 nanometers and is concentrated in the periphery of
the retina. For 10 points, name this shape, which is taken by Bacillus
bacteria and cells in the eye that sense low levels of light and
complement cone cells. Amartya Kumar Sen This thinker discusses the
fetishistic handicap in a paper that contrasted the examples of a
pleasure-wizard and a cripple to mount a moral criticism on
utilitarianism from case-implication. This thinker included the
commitment to minimal freedom and general functionality as two of
three criteria that cannot be simultaneously satisfied; he illustrated
that idea with the example of Lewd and Prude who can be given a copy
of (*) Lady Chatterly’s Lover. This thinker showed that a commitment
to Pareto Optimality is impossible in the “liberal paradox” and he
argued that inefficient distribution mechanisms caused the title
events in another work.  For 10 points, name this Nobel Prize-winning
economist who wrote Povery and Famines, which presented case studies
of his native India. The Mikado: or The Town of Titipu [prompt on “The
Town of Titipu”] In this opera, two characters decide to marry in a
song beginning, “there is beauty in the belly of the beast.” Katisha
falls in love with a man who tells of a bird that sang, “willow,
titwillow, titwillow,” in this opera that also describes how “a cheap
and chippy chopper on a big black block” is to be used to deliver the
“sensation of a short, sharp (*) shock” at the hand of an ex-tailor
who has a “little list.” The song “Three Little Maids from school”
introduces the lover of the protagonist, whose father made flirting a
capital crime. This opera is set in Titipu, where Pooh-bah holds all
titles except the one held by Ko-Ko, Lord High Executioner. This opera
ends with Yum-Yum’s marriage to Nanki-poo. For 10 points, name this
Gilbert and Sullivan opera about a town ruled by the title Emperor of
Japan. free will [accept freedom; or choice; or freedom of the will]
In his prize essay, Schopenhauer attempted to derive this property
from self-consciousness by positing three types of freedom. William
James proposed a two stage model of this idea - that model was
compared to biological evolution by Ernst Mayr. A book about the
“varieties of [this concept] worth wanting” proposes that intuition
pumps have been unconsciously used to explain it. This concept is
explained in (*) Daniel Dennett’s Elbow Room. Because it does not
possess this property, the ass in Buridan’s thought experiment will
eventually die. Compatibilist accounts hold that this concept can be
reconciled with a fixed universe.  For 10 points, name this idea that
is contrasted with determinism, and which allows humans to make their
own decisions. Oriental Republic of Uruguay [or Republica Oriental del
Uruguay] In 2010, the International Court of Justice upheld this
country’s right to operate two paper mills on a river that forms its
western border. This country’s northern border is marked by the
Cuareim River. This country contains the western half of the Merin
Lagoon. The only UNESCO World Heritage site in this country is the
historic quarter of Colonia del (*) Sacramento. The highest point in
this country is the Cerro Catedral. This country’s namesake river has
a tributary called the Rio Negro; that namesake river forms its
western boundary. This country has the southernmost capital in the
Americas. For 10 points, name this country on the north shore of the
Rio de La Plata, across from Argentina to its south. South Africa [or
The Republic of South Africa] One writer from this country wrote about
how the “red one,” Paddy Oshea, and Maisy’s lover, Xuma, lead a
strike. In a novel primarily set in this country the protagonist gets
put under surveillance and moves to France to stay with Katya where
she falls in love with the married student Bernard Chabalier. This
country produced the author of Mine Boy, Peter Abrahams, and Etienne
Leroux, a member of the literary movement (*) Die Sestigers. In a
novel set in this country, a man takes a copy of Lincoln’s Gettysburg
Address from his son’s room after visiting John Harrison; in that
novel set here, Mr. Carmichael takes up the defense pro deo for the
murderer who killed Arthur Jarvis. For 10 points, name this country
whose authors produced Burger’s Daughter and Cry, the Beloved Country
by Nadine Gordimer and Alan Paton. Heian period [or Heian-jidai]
During this era, lands were divided up into taxable units called myo,
and the state contracted out local provincial administration to zuryo,
or tax managers, who used the Records Office to settle disputes with
landowners. This period formally began shortly after Prince Sawara was
suspected of Tanetsugu’s murder in the streets of Nagaoka, forcing a
change in capital. Near this period’s end, forces loyal to Emperor
Sutoku lost a civil war called the Hogen Disturbance to his brother
(*) Go-Shirakawa. The reign of Emperor Go-Sanjo was a brief
interregnum in the Fujiwara Clan’s control over the throne in this
period, which saw the rise of the Tendai school and the peak of
Chinese influence. For 10 points, name this period from 794 to 1185 in
which Japanese literature and court life flourished that was ended by
the Genpei War and the formation of the first shogunate. Wallace
Stevens This poet described, “All pleasures and all pains… These are
the measures destined for her soul,” after asking, “What is divinity
if it can come Only in silent shadows and in dreams?” The speaker of
that poem later wonders, when “their warm fields Return no more,
where, then, is paradise?” in a poem that repeats the line, “Death is
the mother of beauty.” This author asked, “Whose spirit is this? we
said, because we knew It was the spirit that we sought,” before
telling how “She (*) measured to the hour its solitude. She was the
single artificer of the world.” This author called out to “Ramon
Fernandez” in a poem beginning, “She sang beyond the genius of the
sea,” and wrote “Sunday Morning.” For 10 points, name this poet of
“The Idea of Order at Key West”  who wrote, “Call the roller of big
cigars,” in “The Emperor of Ice-Cream.” Ranier Maria {Rilke} Shortly
after he finished his The Book of Images, he wrote about a titular
creature for whom “the world is bars, a hundred thousand bars / and
behind the bars, nothing,” in a poem inspired by Auguste Rodin’s
advice that he visit a zoo, “The Panther.” That piece is one example
of his penchant for poetry giving inanimate objects timeless and
lifelike descriptions of action, such as in “The Archaic Torso of
Apollo.” This theme of his is known as “thing-poems,” or
“Dinggedichten,” and many of them can be found in his collection, New
Poems. His main foray into prose is a semi-autobiographical novel
about the lonely Paris existence of the Danish poet Malte Laurids
Brigge, while his seminal poetry collection was written during his
tenure at a castle in Trieste. FTP, identify this German poet of The
Duino Elegies. {Enlil} or {Ellil} His prized possession was once
stolen by a demon while he was bathing. He was unable to get Gerra to
chase after that thief, who had the power to deflect arrows and was
named Zu, so he had Ninurta kill the demon with the help of Ea, to
recover the stolen Tupsimati, or tablets of destiny. Attended by his
minister Nusku, he once was target of an uprising by the Igigi. It was
also he who arranged for the cedar forest to be guarded by Humbaba and
had Enkidu killed in retaliation for the killing of Humbaba and the
Bull of Heaven. The rapist and eventual husband of Ninlil, he was
responsible for unleashing the great flood upon mankind. FTP, name
this hot-tempered god of wind and storms, a ruling god of the Sumerian
pantheon. {Don Pasquale} The title character sings about his desire to
sire six children in “Un Foco Insolito” after being informed a bride
has been found for him, leading his nephew to mournfully consider
going into exile in “Cerchero Lontana Terra,” which is introduced by a
distinctive trumpet solo. The title character gets more than he
bargained for, being henpecked, slapped in the face, and forced to pay
for lavish purchases by his new bride, making him hope for his wife’s
infidelity as a pretext for divorce. The ruse culminates in the garden
with the serenade “Come Gentil” and a love duet, and the title
character tries to get rid of his wife “Sofronia” by allowing Ernesto
to marry Norina, who was really disguised as the fictitious Sofronia
as part of Dr. Malatesta’s plot. FTP, identify this Gaetano Donizetti
opera buffa about the titular aged nobleman. {Hamiltonian} cycle All
of them satisfy the Grinberg formula and one of these is possessed by
every Platonic solid. Their existence can be guaranteed by meeting
either the conditions of Ore’s theorem or of Bondy and Chvatal’s
theorem, and the Smith Network Theorem gives their number as either 0
or even if each vertex posesses three edges. Dirac’s theorem,
generalized by Posa, states that one of these exists for every graph
with 3 or more vertices and a minimum degree of at least n over 2, and
one example of a problem that involves finding one of these is the
traveling salesman problem. Consisting of a path through a graph that
visits every vertex exactly once and returns to the starting point,
for ten points, identify this graph cycle named for the 19th century
Irish mathematician who invented quatternions. {broken window}
(theory) This phrase titles the first section of a work about That
Which is Seen and that Which is Not Seen by Frederic Bastiat, and
concerns the impact of the titular concept on the shoemaker’s trade.
As a theory, this concept has its origins in a 1969 experiment
conducted by Peter Zimbardo, in which a car was left without license
plates in two different communities. Prominent critics of this theory
include Robert Sampson and Stephen Raudenbush, who conducted an
experiment measuring perceived against actual disorder, while famous
implementers of this theory include William Bratton, the former police
chief of New York City and now head of the LAPD. First formulated by
George Kelling and James Q. Wilson in a 1982 Atlantic Monthly article,
for ten points, identify this sociological theory which posits that
ignoring minor felonies, such as the titular shattered glass,
generates a perception of apathy and leads to more crime. {Our Mutual
Friend} In this novel, Mortimer Lightwood is called to view a find
made in the opening scene by a girl named Lizzie and her scavenging
father, Gaffer, the rival of Rogue Riderhood. In the process, Lizzie
starts making eyes with Eugene Wrayburn, creating a tangential love
plot to the story of the protagonist, who seeks to reclaim his role as
“The Golden Dustman,” which he lost after an assault by George
Radfoot, whom he killed in self-defense. While the replacement heir,
Noddy Boffin, is the target of a blackmail scheme by the one-legged
Silas Wegg, the protagonist woos Bella Wilfer under a false name
before reclaiming his true identity. FTP, identify this work in which
John Rokesmith turns out to be John Harmon in disguise, the last
completed novel of Charles Dickens. {NO MA’AM} or {National
Organization of Men Against }{Amazonian}{ Masterhood} This memory of
this group is honored in a theme song describing how “Eden turned to
Hades” and posted on the personal website of E.E. Bell. Once gaining
national popularity as an evangelist church as the result of a plan to
avoid paying taxes on alcohol, it saw its success fade upon the
discovery of photos of its founder dining out with his wife. The rival
organization of FANG, it also had its members stage a televised
takeover of a Jerry Springer talk show and spearhead the creation of a
blue collar baseball league to fill the void of the 1994 strike, where
its founder became a star under the mispronounced name “Birdie.”
Featuring such members as Sergeant at Arms Ike, Member at Large Griff,
and Treasurer Bob Rooney, this is, FTP, what anti-feminist drinking
club led by Al Bundy on Married with Children? {People’s Will} or
{Narodnaya Volya} Upon her release from prison, Gesia Gelfman became
one of the more prominent female members of this group, which was
infiltrated by a man named Landesen, an undercover agent of the
Okhrana. The product of a schism that also produced the Black
Repartition, this group published the Worker’s Gazette and experienced
initial failures in efforts targeting Eduard Todleben and the Kamenny
Bridge. Their greatest scheme was initially threatened by the arrest
of Andrei Zhelyabov, but with Vera Figner’s continued efforts at
planning, was carried out by a group of four, with Ignaty Grinevitzky
being the direct perpetrator, unintentionally killing himself as well
in the ensuing explosion on that March 1881 day. FTP, name this
radical Russian terrorist group responsible for the assassination of
Alexander II. {Principia Ethica} At the beginning of the second
chapter of this work, the author divides the titular subject into
naturalistic and metaphysical types, and devotes that chapter to the
naturalistic form. This work’s third chapter references A.E. Taylor’s
Problems of Conduct and attributes to the naturalistic fallacy the
prevalence of that chapter’s subject, hedonism. Its first chapter
points out that Henry Sidgwick has been the only one so far to
recognize that “the good” is indefinable and the author of this book
objects to naturalism on the grounds that “it offers no reason at all…
for any ethical principles,” and that it is often the cause of
acceptance of “false principles.” Concerned with the application of
logic to questions of conduct, for ten points, identify this 1903
philosophical work, whose title is similar to a later work by Russell
and Whitehead and whose author is G. E. Moore. {precession} (accept
“precession of the equinoxes” before *) The occurrence of this
phenomenon with respect to the earth results in the Milankovitch
cycles, and a (*) relativistic form of this phenomenon results from
the noncommutativity of infinitesimal Lorentz transformations. A more
common form of this phenomenon is exploited in such techniques as NMR
and has a frequency given by the product of the gyromagnetic ration
and the applied magnetic field. It is the term given to the tumbling
of an object about an unstable Euler axis, and when applied to a top
subject to a torque, it is given by the time-dependence of one of the
Euler angles. Coming in Larmor, Thomas, torque-free, and torque-
induced forms, for ten points, identify this periodic motion of a
rigid body, which on earth is responsible for the shift in the
positions of stars over a period of 26,000 years. Zoltan {Kodaly} Late
choral works by this man include the Epitaphium Joannis Hunyadi for
voice and piano, and his final piece, a fantasy for mixed chorus and
organ, In Praise of Organs. In addition to his Intermezzo for String
Trio, he composed two string quartets, the first in C minor and the
second having only two movements, though none of those chamber works
are performed as often as his Opus 8, a virtuoso sonata for solo
cello. Among his larger scale works are his Symphony in C Major,
Summer Evening, and Dances of Galanta. Of his two operas, one is
entitled The Spinning Room, while the other is the comic tale of a
titular old Austrian veteran who tells tall tales about having
defeated Napoleon and his army, and is more often performed as a
condensed six movement suite. FTP, identify this colleague of Bela
Bartok, the 20th Century Hungarian composer of Hary Janos. {Baffin}
Bay Among the inlets present in this body of water is Admiralty Inlet,
and it is connected to the Kane Basin by the Smith Sound. Towns
located on the shores of this body of water include Clyde River and
Savissivik, and its west side is home to a similarly-named current
that flows south through it at about 11 miles per day. Devon Island
and the Parry channel can both be found at its northwest corner, and
another inlet of it is the Umanak Fjord. Though its tides are not as
high as the Bay of Fundy, they are nevertheless powerful and produce a
trademark churning of ice, and on the southeast, it is connected to by
the Davis Strait, to the Labrador Sea. Explored by Robert Bylot but
named for his lieutenant, for ten points, identify this body of water
bounded by Ellesmere Island to the north, Greenland to the east, and
its namesake Canadian island to the west. {Ecclesiastes} (accept
“{Qoheleth}” on an early buzz, prompt on “The {Preacher}” on an early
buzz) This book’s eighth chapter expounds on the futility of trying to
understand life’s inequalities, penultimate chapter opens with the
message that good deeds will eventually bring rewards, saying that one
should “Cast thy bread upon the waters, for thou shalt find it after
many days,” and ends with a carpe diem message to “Rejoice… in thy
youth,” in its closing section, “Advice for the Young.” The preceding
chapter, this book’s tenth, contrasts the fool and the wise man, and
introduces the metaphor of a fly in the ointment. Its overall message
emphasizes that true happiness can only be found through faith in God,
and not in the pleasures of the earthly world “under the sun.”
Repeatedly mentioning “vanity” and also called Qoheleth, or, “the
Preacher,” this is, FTP what Old Testament book allegedly written by
Solomon, which comes after Proverbs and offers such pearls of wisdom
as, “to every thing there is a season?” Wassily {Leontief} He
conducted an economic analysis of weapons production and distribution
in Military Spending, which he co-authored with Faye Duchin. Duchin
also collaborated with him on a work assessing the possible effects of
computer entry into the market on the role of humans in production in
The Future Impact of Automation on Workers. The author of Studies in
the Structure of the American Economy, he observed that the U.S. was
less capital-intensive in its exports than in its imports, despite
being the world’s most capital abundant country, a challenge to the
Heckscher-Ohlin model that became known as his paradox. His most
lasting contribution centers on a table showing how the production
process of goods is spread out across different sectors of an economy.
FTP, identify this Russian economist, who developed input-output
analysis. The {Blood Knot} One of its main characters, who rambles
about Minnie and Connie and his desire for a woman, routinely bathes
his feet upon coming home to relieve blisters from working long days
as a gatekeeper, charged with keeping undesirable minorities out of a
public park. When that character seems to find love, he is nervous to
learn that her brother Cornelius is a policeman, and blows his money
on a suit for the other protagonist to wear for her and thus pose as
him. However, Ethel Lange never appears, revealing she is engaged, and
ending the romantic pen-pal correspondence that stemmed from her
personals ad. Centering on a pair of half-brothers in Port Elizabeth,
one of whom can pass for white, while the other is black, this is,
FTP, what play about the familial ties between Morris and Zachariah in
apartheid-era South Africa, a work by Athol Fugard? {Louis IX} (prompt
on “{Saint Louis}”) His issuing of the Peace of Lorris saw him receive
an oath of loyalty from a former enemy, Raymond of Toulouse, and his
suppression of a revolt in Poitou inspired the same from Hugh of
Lusignans. He renounced claims to Barcelona and Roussillon after
negotiating with James I of Aragon for the Treaty of Corbeil, while
his major non-political endeavors include ordering the publishing of
the Morgan Bible and the erection of the Sainte-Chappelle. The main
rival of this son of Blanche of Castile was Henry III of England, whom
he would defeat in the Battle of Taillebourg, leading to the Treaty of
Paris. Dying while beginning the Eighth Crusade, an attempt to reverse
his failure leading the Seventh Crusade, this is, FTP, which 13th
Century French king, whose piety made him the only one to become a
saint? {basal ganglia} These regions project to the thalamus by the
direct path through Forel's fields surrounding the zona incerta, and
by the indirect path through ansa lenticularis around the subthalamic
nucleus. Their cells are divided into cholinergic matrisomes and
peptide-rich striasomes, and lesions in them can cause the sinusoidal
movement known as athetosis. Lying medial to the claustrum, they
contain the nuclei accumbens that connect two of their components, and
receive fibers from the substantia nigra. Disorders like St. Vitus
dance and dyskinesia are associated with lesions in their components,
which include globus pallidus, caudate, and putamen. FTP name these
areas of the brain surrounding the internal capsule involved in motor
programming. {Beata Beatrix} This central background image in this
painting, framed by two walls of shrubbery, is an overwhelmingly lit
maritime cityscape, presumably showing a bridge over the Arno. The
right background contains a well, next to which is a shadowy man
holding a book and staring at the red tunic-wearing man on the left,
who carries a flaming heart and personifies love. To the right of the
title character is a sundial set at nine o’clock, while the redheaded
title character herself, wearing a green and red outfit, sits with her
head back and eyes closed in a trancelike state, perhaps foreshadowing
her imminent death. A red bird flies in to drop a white poppy in the
hands of the title character, who represents the painter’s wife,
Elizabeth Siddal. FTP, identify this painting that alludes to the poet
Dante’s love for the title character, a work by Dante Rossetti. {Augie
March} After injuring his head falling off a horse, he later decides
to enlist in the Merchant Marines, where a torpedo sinks his vessel,
and he ends up stranded in a lifeboat with the deranged carpenter,
Bateshaw. Running a scam for textbooks with Padilla and playing an elf
for a mall Santa are two of the many occupations of this friend of
Clem Tambow and brother of the retarded Georgie, who resists the
efforts of Grandma Lausch to groom him into a manipulative social
climber. In contrast, he watches as the wealthy Charlotte Magnus is
won by his gold-digging brother Simon, while he himself loses his
beloved Thea Fenchel and settles for marrying the actress Stella
instead. FTP, name this Chicago-born Jew, whose picaresque
“adventures” are told in a novel by Saul Bellow? HMS {Gaspee } John
Mawney and the slave Aaron Briggs provided two of the three American
eyewitness accounts of the incident involving it, revealing that
planning was done at the tavern of James Sabin. A failed attempt to
pursue Benjamin Lindsey had led up to the event, which was incited by
John Brown, according to the account by Ephraim Bowen. Joseph Bucklin
fired the only injuring shots, but the instigators decided instead to
move the crew and tend to the wounds of Lieutenant Duddingston rather
than kill anyone. Nonetheless, the men in the fleet of eight longboats
under Abraham Whipple, who had set out from Namquit Point to protest
its crew’s enforcement of anti-smuggling laws, destroyed it in
Narragansett Bay. FTP, identify this British ship burned by Rhode
Island colonists in a 1772 incident. Benito {Juarez} As his country’s
minister of justice, this man supported the Lerdo Law, and one of this
man’s major achievements was to create a treasury surplus in part by
discouraging empleomania. Exiled by General Felix Zuloaga, this man
was also opposed by Zuloaga’s successor, Miguel Miramon, and his own
forces were led by Gonzalez Ortega. A leader of the La Reforma
movement together with Melchor Ocampo, this man succeeded Ignacio
Comonfort by virtue of being elected at the rump congress in
Queretaro, and he set up his capital in Veracruz in 1858 and a year
later issued the Law of the Reform. Briefly succeded by Maximilian I,
whose forces his general Ignacio Zaragoza defeated at Puebla, and then
again by Porfirio Diaz, for ten points, identify this Zapotec Indian,
Mexico’s president 1861 to 1863 and 1867 to 1871, whose name is given
to the city across the Rio Grande from El Paso. {Yahoos} They dig up
roots, eat several kinds of herbs, and scratch about for carrion, or
sometimes catch weasels and luhimuhs (a sort of wild rat) which they
greedily devour. Nature hath taught them to dig deep holes with their
nails on the side of a rising ground, wherein they lie by themselves.
They swim from their Infancy like Frogs, and are able to continue long
under Water, where they often take Fish, which the Females carry home
to their Young. Once, when the Sorrel Nag allowed Lemuel Gulliver to
bath naked in a river, one of the females of this species, enflamed
with desire grabbed him and stood gazing and howling as he redressed.
FTP, name this race of brutish, degraded creatures having the form and
all the vices of man, who were subject of the equine Houyhnhnms and
whose name is now associated with Jerry Yang and David Filo. The
{Anatomy Lesson} of Dr. Nicolaes {Tulp} (accept equivalents) One of
the people depicted in this work is Aris Kindt, and this painting is
frequently compared with a work on a similar subject featuring
Sebastian Egbertsz [egg-bertz] by Thomas de Keyzer. A man consulting a
notebook looks over the shoulders of the people in front of him in the
back center of this painting, while a tome, possibly a treatise by
Vesalius, can be seen in the lower-right. A set of rules hangs under
the stone archway in the background, while one of the eight men in
this painting leans forward, shadowing the face of the deceased as the
titular character holds up an arm with his forceps. Depicting a public
dissection following a criminal’s execution, for ten points, identify
this group portrait which includes the titular doctor, by Rembrandt
van Rijn. {reduction} The Meerwein-Ponndorf-Verley one synthesizes
acetone as a side product, while the Bouveault-Blanc one produces
methanol and a primary alcohol.  The Benkeser one, also called the
"Nazi method", requires a lithium or calcium catalyst.  A palladium-
barium sulfate catalyst is necessary for the Rosenmund one, which
produces hydrochloric acid and an aldehyde from an acyl chloride and
hydrogen.  Two hydrogens are added to a phenyl group with one
substituent in the Birch one.  Hydrazine is converted to nitrogen gas
and an ester turned into a CH2 group in a two-step process known as
the Wolff-Kishner one.  Also occurring in the conversion of NAD+ to
NADH and FAD to FADH2, FTP, identify this general type of reaction in
which a compound gains electrons. {Geno}(v){a} or {Zena} or {Gênes}
The islands of Thasos and Lesbos in the Aegean were for a time
occupied by the Gateluzi family, a notable family of this city. Their
quarter in Trebizond was known as Leontokastron and their colony in
Constantinople was known as Pera. A famous possession of this city was
captured by Gedik Ahmet Pasha in 1475, a Black Sea port that was one
of the main conduits for the Black Death. Among the notable ruling
families of this naval power were the Spinola, Grimaldi, and a family
that produced the loser at the battle of Preveza, the Doria family.
The long-time rulers of Kaffa, Kerch, and Corsica, FTP, name this
Italian seaport in Liguria perhaps best known for being the birthplace
of Christopher Columbus. {Ixion} Among his children were Phisadie, a
servant of Helen. He shared the same grandfather with Asclepius, and
he fathered the attempted kidnapper of Deianeira with the mother of
Phrixus and Helle of Golden Fleece fame. Another of his children was
the rescuer of Helen, and he was the son of Phlegyas. At Larissa, he
pushed his father in law onto a bed of burning coals, as his bride had
not come with the money whose payment was incumbent on Deinoeus. He
would later come to Olympus, but his lust for Hera led to this to this
husband of Dia being struck with a thunderbolt and being condemned to
a fiery wheel. FTP, name this progenitor of the Centaurs, a Lapith
king of Thessaly. The {Wind-up Bird Chronicle} Rumor has it that
Radiohead's Thom Yorke once recommended this book to fans at a
concert. When we first meet the narrator, he is cooking spaghetti
while listening to Rossini's "The Thieving Magpie," but keeps getting
interrupted by salacious phonecalls. Events that follow include the
loss of a beloved cat, the beginnings of the evil Toru Okada's
political career, weird entaglements with two psychic prostitutes, and
a terrifying first-hand account of the battle of Nomonhan, all of
which lead conclude with the narrator sitting at the bottom of a well,
clutching a baseball bat. FTP, name this 1996 novel by Haruki
Murakami, named for a bizarre animal the narrator hears every morning.
Wayne {Gretzky} He came to the team with which he is most associated
for $700,000 and left that team in a trade for Jimmy Carson and Martin
Gelinas, which led his previous owner Peter Pocklington being burned
in effigy. Starting out with the Sault (SOO) Ste. Marie Greyhounds, he
played a few games for the Indianapolis Racers before joining a team
that he would lead to glory with help from Glenn Anderson, Jari Kurri,
and Grant Fuhr. Later playing briefly for St. Louis and retiring with
New York, he won five Stanley Cups with Mark Messier in Edmonton. Now
embroiled in a scandal involving his wife Janet Jones, this is, FTP,
what Coyotes coach and legendary hockey star known as the “Great One.”
{Arabic} or Al-Lughat al-{Arabiyya} In this language, perfect plurals
can only take two cases, whereas most other nouns can take three. It
also features a jussive case in which the final vowel marking is
dropped, and its passive features a “u” sound attached to the first
letter and an “i” or “a” to the second. The future in this language is
made by the use of “saufa” or “se” and a present tense verb and
negated by a past tense verb and “len.” Its cases are the majrur [MEJ-
ROOR], mansub [MEN- SOOB], and marfu’ [MAHR-FOO], and all nouns must
have tanween, though in this language’s amiya dialects, they are
usually dropped. Also known for its idaafa structures, name this
language featuring an abjad and vowel markings called haraket, the
official language of countries like Egypt and Oman. {Hubble}’s
constant or parameter Its variation with time depends on a parameter
that is given by one plus this quantity’s derivative with respect to
time times its inverse square. It can be determined from the slope of
the low-redshift region of the plot of magnitude against redshift, and
theoretically it can be obtained from the integration of the first of
the Friedmann equations. Since the curvature has recently been found
to be zero, this quantity only depends on the density and the
cosmological constant, and the WMAP project used the cosmic microwave
background to give a recent value of 71 plus or minus 4 kilometers per
second per megaparsec for this parameter. For ten points, idenitfy
this eponymous astrophysical parameter, the proportionality constant
between recessional velocity and distance whose inverse gives the age
of the universe. {Ninth }of {Av} or {Tisha B’Av} This holiday shares
many of the same prohibitions as Yom Kippur, but only certain sections
of the Torah can be studied on this day. In the three-week period
leading up to it, Bein ha-M’tsarim, haircuts and buying clothes other
than socks or underwear are prohibited, and the period beginning with
Rosh Hodesh or “beginning of the month” is a period of mourning. Often
preceded by Seder ha-Mafseket, important events such as the
declaration of the First Crusade and the expulsion of the Jews from
Spain, as well as the burning of the first two temples, are supposed
to have occurred on this most tragic day for the Jews. FTP, name this
holiday which falls on a certain day in the second week of a Jewish
month. Kurt {Weill} His first song cycle was Ofrahs Lieder, his first
opera Der Protagonist, and his first traditional musical comedy, a
collaboration with Maxwell Anderson, was Knickerbocker Holiday, for
which he wrote the ballad “September Song”. His work with his best-
known collaborator includes the ballet Die Sieben Todsünden, written
in Paris three years after they first split, and the operas Aufsteig
und Fall der Stadt Mahagonny and Die Dreigoschenoper, a socialist
adaptation of Gay’s Beggar’s Opera revived by Marc Blitzstein as The
Threepenny Opera. FTP, who is this German composer of the song “Mack
the Knife”, most famous for his collaborations with Bertolt Brecht?
{Alberta} One of its largest cities got its name from Saamis (SAH-AH-
UMP-SIN), a type of native headgear, and it;s home to Cardston, a
Mormon town founded by Orson Scott Card’s father. Geographical
features of its north include the Caribou and Birch Mountains, and its
rivers include the Wabasca and the Peace River. Drumheller is home to
a world-renowned paleontology museum, and its main national parks
include Wood Buffalo, Banff, and Jasper. Home to Lethbridge and
Medicine Hat, FTP, name this Canadian province whose largest cities
are Calgary and Edmonton. {Lochner} v. New York The majority opinion
in this case cited Mugler v. Kansas and Crowley v. Christensen as
evidence that the 14th Amendment was not designed to interfere with
property and liberty. Allgeyer v. Louisiana was also cited by the
majority, delived by Rufus Peckham, from which John Harlan dissented
by citing that the determination of harm had been made and that it was
not for the courts to ask whether this determination was correct.
Three years after this case, David Brewer’s opinion, written for a
unanimous majority, distinguished this case from Muller v. Oregon by
pointing to “the difference between the sexes,” and this case itself
resulted from a fine of $50 to the plaintiff in Oneida County. Famous
for Oliver Wendell Holmes’ dissent stating that “the 14th Amendment
does not enact Mr. Herbert Spencer’s Social Statics,” for ten points,
identify this 1905 Supreme Court case which dealt with the working
hours of bakers. {Michaelis-Menten }equation or kinetics George Briggs
and John Haldane showed that its pre-equilibrium step is unnecessary
and instead applied steady-state approximation to calculate its
constant as the sum of the backward rate and catalytic constants
divided by the forward rate constant. Based on Victor Henri's work,
its constant is equal to the dissociation constant when the turnover
number is small, and also equal to the concentration at which the rate
is equal to half the maximum rate. Reciprocal of the Lineweaver-Burk
equation, FTP name this equation of enzyme kinetics named for German
and Canadian chemists. {supply-side} economics It sees the domestic
interest rate as set by the global one, as set forth in a model of the
open economy by Marcus Fleming. It supports the gold standard and
emphasizes value over quantity. Criticized by Paul Krugman, it claims
lineage to classical economics, and especially Say's law. Described in
the book The Way the World Works by Jude Wanniski, who is credited
with coining this term, it emphasizes the growth of firms as an
incentive as opposed to money supply and monetarism. Blaming
stagflation on Keynesian economics, FTP name this economic theory
based on the possible increase in tax revenue associated with tax
cuts, as codified in the Laffer curve, sometimes called Reaganomics.
{Captain Marvel} Three females have been given this name, although
Carol Danvers had it only on the House of M alternative timeline and
Monica Rambeau gave it up to become Photon. Four others, including the
other female, are members of the alien race Kree. The most famous
character with this name was created by C.C. Beck and Bill Parker in
books published by Fawcett Comics, and as the most popular superhero
of the 1940s, sold more copies than Superman. FTP, name this superhero
that changes from the mortal Billy Batson by yelling “Shazam!” and who
is published by DC Comics, despite what his name might imply. Henri
{Bergson} He criticized Fechner’s law and the confusion of duration
with extension in his doctoral thesis. He elaborates on the
distinction between qualitative and quantitative multiplicities in his
most famous work, and emphasized the idea of intuition. Although he
had solved a famous problem by Pascal at the age of 18, he chose to
study humanities upon entering the Ecole Normale. Author of The Two
Sources of Morality and Religion and Matter and Memory, he attacked
the Kantian notion of linked space-time, which he viewed as unfaithful
to the actual "duration," or la duree, which characterizes conscious
experience and free action. FTP name this winner of the 1927 Nobel
prize in literature who is best known for philosophical concepts like
élan vital, author of Time and Free Will and Creative Evolution.
William Ernest {Henley} Robert Louis Stevenson based Long John Silver
in part on this writer, not least because of hia amputated leg. As
editor of the National Observer, he helped introduce the English
public to such writers as Thomas Hardy and Rudyard Kipling. One poem
by this man called Pro Rege Nostro contains the question, “When shall
[the Sun] rejoice again, such a breed of mighty men, as come forward
one to ten?” and a line from that poem was adopted by D.H. Lawrence
for the title of his short story, England, My England. Though he was
the author of such collections as The Song of the Sword and The Song
of Speed, he is better known for a poem published in 1875, whose last
stanza claimed that it didn’t matter “how strait the gate” or “how
charged with punishments the scroll” and that “I am the captain of my
soul.” For ten points, identify this author of the collection In
Hospital, best known as the poet of Invictus. {Triton} It is estimated
to be as much as 25% water ice, and its atmosphere has pressure of
only about one millibar.  The furthest body from the sun known to be
volcanically active, its so-called "ice volcanoes" shoot nitrogen or
methane into the atmosphere.  As it could not have formed from the
Solar Nebula, the capture theory is the most popular theory as to why
it is where it is today.  Its orbit currently draws it into the gas
giant it rotates, so it will eventually either break up or crash into
that planet.  Only five other moons, each less than one tenth its
diameter in size, exhibit a retrograde orbit.  Its extremely high
albedo makes it the coldest known body in the solar system, even
colder than Pluto, with which it has very similar properties. FTP,
identify this largest moon of Neptune. {1876} The first major post-
Election Day controversy in this election occurred when William
Gleason challenged the results of a local election he had lost,
leading to a recount in which the votes of an entire precinct were
thrown out. Another occurred when one of Oregon’s electors was found
to be a postmaster and therefore ineligible to be an elector, and
another happened when Colorado didn’t even bother to put the
presidential race on its ballot. Yet another started when Joseph P.
Bradley joined the committee to decide disputed votes after
independent David Davis was elected to the Senate. FTP, identify this
controversy-marred election in which, despite winning a majority of
the popular vote, Samuel Tilden lost to Rutherford B. Hayes. The
{Taming of the Shrew}; as opposed to the anonymous “The Taming of a
Shrew” In a lesser-known contemporaneous work with an almost identical
title and plot, Aurelius and Polidor have no competition for the hands
of Phylena and Emelia, respectively. However, in this work, one of
those two daughters is absent entirely, meaning Gremio, Hortensio and
Lucentio have to fight over Bianca. In both plays, the problem is
finding someone willing to marry the eldest daughter Kate. FTP, what
is this Shakespearean play whose plot also inspired the movie Ten
Things I Hate About You and the musical Kiss Me, Kate? {amyloid}
fibers or plaques or aggregates They are produced when ps1 and ps2 in
Notch signaling are mutated, causing gamma secretase to be malformed.
The type I aspartyl proteases known as beta- secretase BACE1 and BACE2
can also produce them by cleaving their precursor protein at the +1
and +11 sites. They exhibit apple-green birefringence upon binding of
congo red, as well as a cross-beta sheet quaternary structure. Curlin
and tissue plasminogen form this type of structure naturally in living
cells, without causing disease, but they are also symptomatic of the
diseases kuru and type II diabetes. FTP, name this protein structure
of prions, found in the beta type seen in Alzheimer’s patients.
{M(e)dina(t)(un)} PROMPT ON {Mada’in(un)} (apparently the Maltese city
is pronounced UM-DEE-NAH)  [Basically, the answer we want here is
{Medina}, and that answer has all sorts of alternate spellings] One
city of this name, known as the Silent City, is located very close to
the town of Rabat and is one of the most historically important cities
on the Maltese island of Ghawdex [AW-DESH], or Gozo. A less common
plural of this name gives part of the name of the most famous
Nabataean ruins in Saudi Arabia, as well as the Arabic name for the
Sassanian capital of Ctesiphon [TESS-IH-FAWN]. With Habu, it is the
name of the funerary temple to the Egyptian pharaoh Ramesses III. The
most famous place with this name is commonly referred to with the
epithet “al-Munawwara,” meaning “the radiant”, or “an-Nebi.”
Originally a city home to two pagan tribes, and interestingly, three
Jewish tribes, it is famous for the Masjid Quba [MESS-JID KOO-BA] and
was known as Yathrib in pre-Islamic times. Also home to Masjid an-
Nabawi [MESS-JID EN-NEH-BUH-WEE], or the Prophet’s Mosque, and the
destination of a famous emigration, this is, FTP, which holy city of
Islam, located in Saudi Arabia, whose simple name is Arabic for city.
{Palmyra} or {Tadmor} To the southwest of this city are the burial
chambers known as the towers of Yemliko, and the Hypogea of Yarhai and
the Three Brothers, as well as the Japanese tomb are the best-
preserved underground tombs at this site. A member of its royal
family, Vaballathus, died on his way to Rome as a captive, and this
city’s Tariff Court was the site of an important stele. Among the
local gods to whom temples are dedicated here is Nabo, and this city
was loyal to Rome up until the slaying by Maconius of Septimius
Odaenathus. Then, a woman ruling on behalf of her son claimed descent
from Antony and Cleopatra started taking over large amounts of Asia
Minor and Syria, supposedly to protect Rome from the Sassanids. FTP,
name this ancient city whose centerpiece is the Temple of Bel, a town
in the desert of Syria once ruled by Zenobia. Bertrand {Russell}
Author of A Critical Exposition of the Philosophy of Leibniz and
Marriage and Morals, he was influenced by McTaggart and married the
Quaker Alys Pearsall Smith. He wrote a dissertation on the foundations
of geometry and published his first book on German Social Democracy.
His last works were An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth and Human
Knowledge, Its Scope and Limits, and his trip to Russia resulted in
the critical The Practice and Theory of Bolshevism. Imprisoned for his
pacifism during World War I, FTP name this English philosopher who
collaborated with Whitehead on Principia Mathematica. {Bauhaus} Its
expulsion from its original city occurred after a series of pranks,
including painting a town statue red, leading to right-wing protests
and budget cuts. Its second leader, Hannes [HAH-nuss] Meyer, was
removed after only one year and replaced by the director of Deutscher
Werkbund. Oskar Schlemmer painted a staircase about it, and Kandinsky
and Klee were also associated with it. Officially dissolved in 1933
after Dessau came under Nazi control, it was led at one time by Ludwig
Mies van der Rohe. Coming from the German for “building” and “house,”
FTP, name this school of modern industrial design founded in Weimar by
Walter Gropius. {Ursula} Iguaran Buendia Her aunt married her
husband’s uncle in a union that produced a child with a grotesque
deformation that she would fear all one hundred thirty plus years of
her life. She kept her husband from impregnating her by wearing a
chastity belt, until he was forced to kill Prudencio Aguilar, in a
duel to defend his manliness. She went on to have four children, none
of whom possessed the pig’s tail that she had so feared. FTP, name
this wife of Jose Arcadio Buendia, the matriarch of Gabriel Garcia
Marquez’s One Hundred Years of Solitude. {concrete operation}al stage
Dasen and Price-Williams found that the horizontal decalage proposed
for this stage varies based on cultural differences. Children can
define intension and extension of a class, but generally cannot
understand concepts like congruence and mass. The ability to decenter
and think reversibly emerge, and they recognize the conservation of
area, number, and matter. Children start telling jokes with double
meanings and take another person's perspective. FTP name this stage
between preoperational and formal operational in Piaget's theory, in
which children manipulate logical concepts. (Weak or Strong) {Law of
Large Numbers} (prompt on “(Empirical) Law of Averages”) The
Kolmogorov criterion can be used to determine whether one version of
this law applies, while the other version of this law can be proved
quite easily using Chebyshev’s Inequality. The two versions use
definitions first enunciated by Ernst Fischer and Friedrich Riesz,
showing a limit either in measure and pointwise. Probably first proven
in its weak form by Jakob Bernoulli, it is of important use to
economists, as well as in setting significance levels in hypothesis
testing. Stating that for a collection of independent and identically
distributed random variables, the mean of n of them converges to the
expectation of any of them as n goes to infinity, FTP, identify this
law often grouped with the Central Limit Theorem, a more correct
version of the Law of Averages. {Dwight} K. {Schrute} (accept either)
In a deleted scene we learn that his ideal woman is a survivor of
monster rape; in that episode we also learn that he looks for “large
breasts” in a woman because babies in his family are “very thirsty”.
He lost his fifth-grade spelling bee on the word “failure.” In a
commercial for the Winter Olympics, he claims that he could win the
biathlon by hanging back and shooting all the other competitors.
Recently, he used landmark quotes of Communism in a rabble- rousing
speech at the Northeast Sales Association. FTP, identify this
bespectacled character on the American version of The Office. {Berlin
Congress} or {Congress of Berlin} The French sent Desprey, Saint-
Vallier, and Waddington to the first meeting of this name, which gave
Dobruja to Romania and Cyprus to Great Britain and created the
autonomous area of Eastern Rumelia. The second meeting of this name
was called after Britain and Portugal signed a treaty preventing the
French from taking advantage of treaties signed by Savorgnan [SAH-
VORE- NYAHN] de Brazza. FTP, give the shared name of these 1878 and
1884 meetings, one of which was called to modify the Treaty of San
Stefano, and one which gave most of the rules in the “scramble for
Africa.” {Songs of Innocence} (accept “William {Blake}” until the end
of the first sentence; accept “{Songs of Innocence and Experience}”
until *) “Father, father, where are you going” begins “The Little Boy
Lost,” which, unlike “A Little Boy Lost,” appears (*) in this
collection. The lighthearted tone of “Infant Joy” contrasts with the
author’s later “Infant Sorrow.” Unlike in a later poem of the same
name, Tom Dacre cries when his head is shaved so the “soot cannot
spoil [his] white hair.” The most famous poem in the collection asks
the title animal “Dost thou know who made thee,” but this animal has
“Softest clothing wooly bright” instead of, as in a poem written five
years later, “fearful symmetry.” FTP, identify this 1789 collection of
poems including “The Chimney Sweeper” and “The Lamb,” which author
William Blake later merged with his poems on experience. {Pwyll} [POO-
ill] He resisted the temptation of another man’s wife for a year,
after which he defeated Havgan. He climbed the hill Gorsedd [GORE-seð]
Arberth after being told he would either be wounded or see a wonder
once he sat on it, and he indeed saw his future wife. He defeated
Gwawl through his wife’s trickery, but lost his son Pryderi when six
women watching over him fell asleep at the same time. The Lord of
Dyfed, FTP, identify this hero of the first branch of the Mabinogion
and husband of Rhiannon. {chimera} In Full Metal Alchemist, it is the
specialty of Shou Tucker, the Sewing Life Alchemist. The novel by this
name tells three stories from different perspectives, including one
told by Dunyazade, sister of Scheherazade, while Derek Mahon wrote
some poems collected by the plural of this name. In art and design, it
identifies a pale purple or lavender color. In biology, it identifies
an organism with genetically distinct cells from two different
zygotes. In Mission: Impossible II, it is the name of the virus that
only the appropriately-named drug Bellerophon can cure. FTP, identify
this word, which, in Greek mythology, names a fire-breathing monster
that was part lion, part goat, and part snake. Symphony No. {10} by
Mahler This work was left incomplete and unperformable until Deryck
Cooke revised it. The first movement, a 25-minute Adagio, follows
directly from his previous symphony and features a background
quotation of prelude to Act 3 of Parsifal. The second movement, an
incomplete neo-classical Scherzo, features a Landler trio. The third
movement, written after the composer has discovered her wife's affair
with an architect, contained references to Wagner's fate motif and was
titled "Purgatorio oder Inferno." The fourth movement, an 11-minute
fast waltz, is related to the "Trinklied" from Das Lied von der Erde
[EHR-duh]. The fifth movement, a tender Finale, ends with a
redeclaration of love for Alma. FTP identify this final Gustave Mahler
symphony, who wrote one more than the usual symphonist. {Kamchatka}
This region was nearly purchased by an American named Washington
Vanderlip Jr., who had been confused with a president of what is now
CitiBank. Among its native residents are the Evens [EH-VENS] and
Korayaks, and the one road in this region connects the regional
capital with the town of Esso. Bordered on the north by the Shelikov
Gulf, its capital is one of a plethora of Petropavlovsks and is the
largest city on any of the five continental mainlands not connected to
the rest of its continent by road. FTP, name this region, bordered by
Sea of Okhotsk and the Bering Sea, a Far Eastern Russian peninsula.
The {Masque of the Red Death} This short story takes place in rooms
with stained glass windows that gives each room the appearance of
being blue, purple, green, orange, white, and violet, but the seventh,
scarlet room does not match its black velvet carpets.  The author
takes care to note that sixty minutes is equivalent to three thousand
and six hundred seconds, and uses the phrase “out-Heroded Herod” to
describe an unwanted party guest.  Prince Prospero, the party’s host,
succumbs in the blue room, despite having lived in five or six months
of seclusion.  FTP, what is this Poe story about a colorfully named
disease inviting itself to a ball? {semiconservative} DNA replication;
accept “Meselson-Stahl” before it is mentioned Its experimental
revelation is described in a book by Frederic Holmes. E. coli growing
in a medium containing ammonium chloride labeled with nitrogen-15 and
then nitrogen-14 was used to show that indeed the process occurs in
this way. A cesium chloride gradient was used to differentiate between
DNA labeled on both strands with 15-N, both with 14-N, or one with
15-N and one with 14-N. FTP, name this method by which DNA is
replicated in vivo, experimentally confirmed by Meselson and Stahl.
Dymitriy (Ivanovich) {Mendele(y)ev} In 1882 he officially became a
bigamist, but the leader of his country, noting his popularity,
reportedly said he “has two wives, yes, but I have only one” of him.
He once traveled solo in a balloon to observe a solar eclipse, and did
not bother attempting to control the balloon until he had finished his
observations. His master’s thesis was the blandly titled “Research and
Theories on Expansion of Substances due to Heat”, while his doctoral
thesis, “On the Combinations of Water with Alcohol”, is said to have
determined the ideal percent alcohol of vodka. His most important work
included predicting the physical properties of germanium, gallium, and
scandium using what is now his most famous invention. For 10 points,
name this Russian chemist, inventor of the periodic table of the
elements. {Advent} The first reference to it is in the title of two
homilies by St. Maximus, while the concept was definitely mentioned in
homilies by St. Caesarius. St. Theodore the Studite does not mention
it, indicating it appeared fairly late in the Greek Orthodox Church.
The eighth homily of Pope Leo I is still used widely, and a collection
of homilies by Pope Gregory I begins during this church season.
Although Pope Innocent III recommended black for the color of the
priest’s robes, violet is the primary color in use. Beginning with the
Sunday nearest the Feast of St. Andrew and starting the liturgical
year, this is, FTP, what season that immediately precedes Christmas?
{Daphne and Apollo} or {Apollo and Daphne} The fresco above this work
in the museum to which it belongs depicts the same scene as painted by
Dosso Dossi. Intended to be viewed from a fixed spot, as though it
were a relief, the “back” side of this sculpture provides little
information. Of the two figures depicted, one has one of his feet off
the ground and his arm around the other one, while the other figure
reaches for the sky in both hands as she glances over her shoulder at
her pursuer. This work is located in the Borghese Gallery next to The
Rape of Proserpina, but depicts a scene from the Metamorphoses, which
can be seen from the fact that the fingers of one of the titular
figures are changing into laurel leaves while her leg can be seen
becoming a tree trunk. For ten points, identify this statue depicting
the attempted abduction by a god of a nymph, a masterpiece of
Gianlorenzo Bernini. {monopsony} The occurrence of this condition in
labor markets is the subject of a 1997 paper by William Boal and
Michael Ransom which gives as examples of this concept professional
baseball players and college athletes. When this condition prevails,
wages are redistributed from the employee to the employer, and the
inverse of the rate of exploitation gives the elasticity of the labor
supply curve. It can lead to market failure by restricting the
quantity of good purchased relative to a Pareto-optimal situation and
can be alleviated in labor markets through a minimum wage. For ten
points, identify this economic condition in which there is only one
buyer. {Ashikaga} or {Muromachi} period (or shogunate) This period saw
the construction of the Tenryu Temple, and the establishment of
diplomatic contact with the Choson dynasty. One military conflict
during this period was preceded by widespread famines and the issuing
of the “acts of grace,” and this period also saw the flourishing of
the renga form under the poet Iio Sogi. It was directly preceded by
the Kemmu restoration, during which Emperor Go-Daigo escaped from
captivity and attempted to reestablish his reign, and although it
survived the Onin War, it collapsed in 1571 with the end of the
Sengoku, or Warring States, period. Taking its alternate name from a
district in Kyoto where its first shogun had his headquarters, for ten
points, identify this period of Japanese history cotemporal with the
shogunate established by Takauji. {Kidnapped} In the last chapter of
this book, a letter from Rankeillor to a lawyer is intended to help
provide legal representation to the main character. An ambush set by
the Vourich clan, led by Cluny, leads to the main character being
carried to Ben Alder, and the showing of a silver button early in this
work leads to the granting of information by Macrob. The Appin murders
provide the backdrop for the conflict between the Campbells and the
Stewarts, and the titular action is performed by Hoseason at the
behest of Ebenezer. Followed in 1893 by a sequel named for James
More’s daughter, Catriona, for ten points, identify this novel about
Alan Breck Stewart and David Balfour, written by Robert Louis
Stevenson. {Song of Solomon} or {Song of Songs} or {Canticle of
Canticles} or {Shor Ha’sharom} (I think this is right, my Hebrew is
not so good) The recent papal encyclical Deus Caritas Est contains an
explication of this text in its sixth section. This work’s first
section includes a comparison with a “cluster of camphire in the
vineyards of Engedi,” while in the fifth section, the speaker claims
to have “gathered my myrrh with my spice… eaten my honeycomb with my
honey.” The seventh section compares the addressee’s nose with “the
tower of Lebanon which looks towards Damascus,” and in several
sections, the daughters of Jerusalem are enjoined to not “stir up, nor
awake” the speaker’s love. With its second section beginning, “I am
the rose of Sharon and the lily of the valleys,” for ten points,
identify this sexy Old Testament text which belongs to the Ketuvim and
which together with Ruth, Lamentations, Ecclesiastes, and Esther makes
up the Megillot. {Bernoulli} equation or principle One relation
bearing this name is the differential equation “y-prime plus p of x
times y equals q of x times y to the nth power.” Using another
relation of this name, Torricelli’s theorem can be derived, and this
relation itself can be derived by integrating over all space and
assuming that the body force is only due to gravity. Since it is only
applicable to stead, incompressible, inviscid flows, all time
derivatives in the Navier-Stokes equations can be set to zero, and
this relation, which expresses the conservation of energy, may be
obtained through integration along a streamline. For ten points,
identify this theorem as a consequence of which pressure drops with
increased fluid velocity, named for Swiss physicist Daniel. {Social
War} or {Marsic War} or {Italic War} One conflict of this name
featured the 197 B.C.E. battle of Cynoscephalae and was also known as
the Second Macedonian War after the leader of one side, Philip V of
Macedon. A more famous conflict of this name was followed by the
Mithridatic War, and that conflict itself grew in part out of the
opposition of Lucius Philippus to a set of reforms proposed by Marcus
Livius Drusus. That conflict featured the declaration of a new state
in Corfinium and the ultimate defeat of the Marsi and the Samnites by
armies under Gnaeus Pompeius Strabo and Lucius Cornelius Sulla. Ending
with Roman victory and the passage of the Julian law granting
citizenship, for ten points, identify this 90 to 89 B.C.E. revolt of
the Italian allies of Rome. {Pavement} One of this band’s songs
references the divisions between Northern and Southern California,
amid chants of “40 million daggers,” and “we want two states.” Another
song concerns a group of “Southern boys just like you and me,” and
describes General Sherman’s encounter with R.E.M. during his march
through Georgia. Formed in Stockton, California, this band replaced
drummer Gary Young with Steve West following the tour for their first
album, Slanted and Enchanted, which was followed up with 1994’s
Crooked Rain, Crooked Rain. Other albums by this group include
Brighten the Corners, and their last effort, Terror Twilight, before
they split up in 1999 and their lead singer formed The Jicks. For ten
points, identify this indie band fronted by Stephen Malkmus. Jose
Julian {Marti} y Perez Two English-language collections of this
writer’s work are Inside the Monster and Our America. A sometime
writer for the Buenos-Aires newspaper La Nacion, this man’s other
writings include essays on Emerson and Whitman, and he was exiled by
Antonio Guzman Blanco from Venezuela for the political stance of his
journal, The Venezuelan Review. In one of his most famous poems, this
man writes that he will cultivate a white rose for both his friends
and his enemies, while another of his poems from his Versos Sencillos
was put to music as the song “Guantanamera.” Best known for his
collection of poetry Versos Libres, for ten points, identify this
poet, who was killed in the battle of Dos Rios in 1895, fighting for
the independence of his home country, Cuba. {Platyhelminthes}; prompt
on "flatworm" Possessing a filled peritoneum, this phylum of animals
include the fish- invading Monogenea and the parasitic flukes like
Schistosoma found in class Trematoda. Ganglia of neurons, ventral
nerve cords, and eyespots make up its nervous system, while networks
of protonephridia capped by flame cells make up its excretory system.
Scolex heads and proglottid sex organs characterize the class
Cestoidea of tapeworms, while free-living Dugesia and other planarians
make up Turbellaria. For ten points, name this acoelomate,
triploblastic, bilaterally symmetric phylum of flatworms.
{International} Style Coined as a term by Henry-Russell Hitchcock and
one of its primary exponents, a major Dutch figure of this movement
was Jacobus Oud, who was one of the contributors to the Weissenhof
Estate exhibition. Some examples of it is the Fagus Works, while
another is Harvard’s Graduate Center, and one of its most famous
constructions is building sitting on pilotis with cantilevered floors
to permit long strip windows, located in Poissy, France. Typical
constructions associated with this movement are rectilinear and
stripped of ornamentation, and one of its tenets was that the form of
a building should grow out of the material from which it is
constructed. Exemplified by such constructions as the Lake Shore Drive
apartments in Chicago, the Seagram building, and the Villa Savoye, for
ten points, identify this architectural style, represented by
cosmopolitans like Philip Johnson, Mies van Der Rohe, and Le
Corbusier. {Sonnet, To Science} In the fifth line, the poet directs an
inquiry to the titular concept, asking, “How should he love thee? Or
how deem he wise, who wouldst not leave him in his wandering.” Another
question directed towards the titular concept is, “Why preyest thou
thus upon the poet’s heart?” and the narrator expresses his desire “to
seek for treasure in the jewelled skies.” Other questions asked in
this poem include “Hast thou not dragged Diana from her car? And
driven the Hamadryad from the wood?” as well as “Hast thou not torn
the Nyad from her flood?” This poem ends with the narrator bemoaning
the fact that the titular entity has taken “the Elfin from the green
grass and from me, the summer dream beneath the tamarind tree.” For
ten points, identify this poem by Edgar Allan Poe, which addresses the
title concept as the “true daughter of Old Time.” the {Hundred Days}
In Chinese history, this phrase refers to a period of reform during
which K’ang Yu-Wei persuaded the Kuang-hsu emperor to issue over 40
edicts following the Sino-Japanese War. This phrase also refers to a
period which began with a famous landing at Cannes, as well as a
period during which all banks remained closed for a “holiday” until
Congress could meet on March 9th. In American history this phrase
refers to a time period which saw the passing of such legislation as
the AAA, and the NIRA, but the most famous period designated by this
name came to an end on June 18, 1815 with the victory of Blucher and
Wellington at Waterloo. For ten points, give the shared name of these
periods of time, the most famous of which refers to the length of
Napoleon’s reign after his return from exile on Elba. {hyperbola} or
{hyperbolic} The Jerabek one is the isogonal conjugate of the Euler
line while the Keipert one provides the general solution to Lemoine’s
problem. The Fuerbach point is the center of a rectangular one, while
the Poincare disk of this type has a metric given by “dx squared plus
dy squared over quantity one minus x square minus y squared.” One of
them can be constructed from two Dandelin spheres touching the
opposite napes of a cone, and a parabaloid of this type is a quadratic
surface with equation “z equals y squared over b squared minus x
squared over a squared.” Also known as the type of non-Euclidean
geometry discovered by Bolya and Lobachevsky, for ten points, identify
this conic section, defined as the set of all points the difference in
whose distance from two fixed foci is a constant. {Tlaloc} His name
translates as “inside the earth” and he shared the Templo Mayor with
another major deity. Designated the eight ruler of the days and the
ninth ruler of the nights, five of the eighteen months of the year
were dedicated to him, and one way of honoring him consisted of the
ritual killing and eating of small idols made of amaranth paste.
Similar to the Mayan god Chac, this god originated as a giant toad
called Tlaltecuhtli [pron: T-lahl-teh-cut-li] and his companion was
Chalchiuhtlicue [pron: chahl-chee-yoot-lee-kew], the goddess of
freshwater lakes and streams. Originally a Nahuatl deity and
worshipped together with Huitzilopochtli and Quetzlcoatl, for ten
points, identify this god who could cause leprosy and rheumatism, the
Aztec god of moisture and storms. The {Lion Hunt} One painting of with
this English title was comissioned by the Bavarian duke Maximilian and
differs from a work painted a year before partly in that the titular
action is being performed by a knight. Jean-Leon Gerome depicted a
group of five people returning from this activity in 1889, and another
painting with this title was executed by Emile Vernet in 1836 and
shows a mounted warrior in the left foreground with a raised spear.
The artist of the most famous painting with this name also painted a
version with the titular activity taking place in Morocco using a
rifle, but the more famous version depicts several Arabs with spears
attacking the titular beasts, which have downed one of the humans and
a horse. For ten points, give the title shared most famously by
paintings of Eugene Delacroix and Peter Paul Rubens, both of which
depict the attempted killing of certain wild cats. {Three Sisters} or
{Tri Sestry} In the first act of this play, a lieutenant colonel says
that, “We shall all be forgotten. Such is our fate and we can’t do
anything about it.” After hearing of Andrey’s desire to translate a
book from English, one of the titular characters claims that knowing
three languages, “is just a… useless encumberance,” and at the end,
another of the titular characters, who is unhappily married to
Kulyghin and abandoned by Vershinin, recites the first lines from
Pushkin’s Ruslan and Lyudmilla. Finally, Solyony kills Teuzenbach in a
duel, and as the doctor Chebutykhin, reading the paper, says “Nothing
matters,” Olga exclaims, “If only we knew.” For ten points, identify
this play about the titular group of siblings, written in 1901 by
Anton Chekhov. {Samarkand} or {Marakanda} The site of Afrosiab, two
kilometers outside of the center of this city, is home to this city’s
ancient ruins and in a nearby structure is a fifty foot sarcophagus
which purportedly contains a perpetually growing body, taken from
Susa, of the prophet Daniel. The oldest standing buildings here date
from the 1380’s, and the grave of one of the Prophet’s cousins, Qusam
ibn-Abbas is located in the Shahr-I-Zindah. The most famous mosque
here is dedicated to the Chinese Bibi-Khanym and the Guri Amir
Mausoleum was the site of a 1941 inspection led by Mikhail Gerasimov
analyzing the remains of this city’s two most famous rulers. Home to
the Ulugh Beg Medrese and the Registan, this is, for ten points, what
city, the capital of Timur, presently situated in Uzbekistan. William
{Congreve} He wrote the libretto to The Judgment of Paris and helped
Handel compose Semele. His first work, Incognita, was published under
the pseudonym Cleophil. He may be better known, however, for writing
“Music has charms to soothe a savage breast” and “Heav’n has no Rage,
like Love to Hatred turn’d,/Nor Hell a Fury, like a Woman scorn’d” in
his tragedy The Mourning Bride. Anne Bracegirdle played many of his
lead females, including Araminta in The Old Batchelor, Angelica in
Love for Love, and Mrs. Millamant in his most famous work. FTP,
identify this English playwright of The Way of the World. {Bonaparte}
One member of this family adopted the title of the comte de
Survilliers [SOOR-vill-YAY] and lived in Bordentown, New Jersey for
two decades, where he made one of the first sightings of the Jersey
Devil and tried to rescue his brother. One of them was known as Plon
Plon, and his son was a governor of the Caucasus in Russia. One member
of this line died fighting the Zulus in the British Army, and another
descendant was for a time Theodore Roosevelt’s Secretary of Navy and
Attorney General. One member of this line was known for his work with
the urban planner Haussmann, and another member of this dynasty styled
himself Lodewijk I [LOW-duh-VAKE] of Holland. Also famously including
a King of Westphalia, this family’s last major ruler was ousted after
the failure at Sedan. FTP, name this line, which included Jerome,
Joseph, and four Napoleons. {Brasília} Several buildings here are
named for the founder of the Salesian order who prophesied about this
site. Among the buildings of the chief architect at the site is the
Catetinho [CAH-TEH-TEE-NYO], a wooden presidential “palace”, and one
of its most famous buildings is composed of two towers, concave and
convex saucers housing the Senate and Chamber of Deputies, with
gardens designed by Burle Marx. Also notable are the tapered pillars
on the façade of the Palace of the Dawn, and the JK Memorial in this
city honors Juscelino [ZHU-SE-LEE-NO] Kubitschek. Two streets called
Eixo [EH-SHO] run east-west and north-south, dividing into city into
Asas Norte e Sul, or north and south wings. With a plan evoking a
butterfly by Lucio Costa, and more commonly described as an airplane,
this is, FTP, what planned capital city of Brazil? Oswaldo Jose
“Ozzie” {Guillen} Barrios From 1989 to 1991, he was fooled by the
hidden ball trick three times, an impressive fact given that no man
since Billy Werber in 1940 had gotten fooled more than once.
Originally signed by the San Diego Padres, he arrived at the team
where he spent most of his career in a deal for La Marr Hoyt. His
career high for home runs was a mere four, but he won a Gold Glove in
1990 and made three All-Star games. Finishing his career with Atlanta,
Baltimore, and Tampa Bay, he briefly coached third base for the doomed
Montreal Expos. He recently accused a current Dodgers player of only
knowing Cancun because he visited there, working now in a position
previously occupied by Jerry Manuel. A longtime major league shortstop
from Venezuela, FTP, name this outspoken manager of the World Champion
Chicago White Sox. {meson}s All but four of these objects are
pseudoscalars, meaning that they change sign under a parity
transformation. There are only two of these objects that are made up
of three different types of constituent particles, and the most famous
of these objects was discovered as the mediator of an eponymous
potential that scales as quantity e to the minus r over r. Another
form of these objects provided the solution to the tau-theta puzzle
and was the particle in which Cronin and Fitch discovered CP
violation. More famously, the discovery of charmonium, more commonly
known as J/psi one, provided experimental confirmation of the
Eightfold Way. FTP identify these hadronic particles which, unlike
baryons, consist of quark-antiquark pairs. {Zoroaster} or
{Zarathustra} or {Zartost} In his book, The Tajiks in the Mirror of
History, President Rahmonov of Tajikistan claimed this son of
Pourushaspa, and this man had a vision in which Vohu Manah, or ‘Good
Purpose’ led him to a prominent deity and five other lesser beings.
This would lead to the pre-eminence of a heptad whose members included
such Amesha Spentas as ‘Health’ and ‘Best Righteousness.’ His religion
saw the daevas as being evil spirits, whereas the evil spirits in
Hinduism, the asuras, were in his eye good spirits. A later attempt to
reconcile his religion’s dualistic tendency saw the creation of
Zurvanism, and the Gathas supposedly represent hymns written by this
man. The ostensible founder of a religion that centered on the cosmic
battle between Ahriman and Ahura Mazda, FTP name this Iranian
religious leader who became the namesake for one of Nietzche’s most
famous works. {Columbia} River Cape Disappointment rests at the point
at which this river meets the ocean, and among the notable sights near
it is the Gingko Petrified Forest, near Vantage, on this river’s west
bank. Among its less notable tributaries are Crab Creek, the Methow,
Sanpoil, Klickitat, and Pend Oreille [POND OH-RAY] rivers, and in its
northern reaches it passes through cities such as Trail. Among the
dams on this river are the Wanapum and Rock Island, and a more notable
one is at the meeting place of four counties. Cities along its course
include Cathlamet, Stevenson, and Wallula, and it separates the two
largest cities in Benton County from the county seat of Franklin
County: Kennewick, Richland, and Pasco respectively. With its most
famous part at The Dalles [DALZ], FTP, name this river featuring the
Grand Coulee Dam that defines the majority of the Washington-Oregon
border. The {Overcoat} or {Shinel} (grudgingly accept The {Cloak}) The
main character’s mother rejected the names Mokiya, Sossiya, Khozdazat,
Triphiliy, Dula, and Vakhtisiy before finally settling on his name.
That character scrimps and saves until after two or three months, he
finally has the eighty rubles necessary to go shopping with Petrovitch
and purchase the title object. However, robbers steal it after he
attends a party thrown by his superior. The main character is advised
to go not to the police but to a “prominent personage” whose identity
is unknown, and after his plea for help is rejected, Akakiy
Akakievitch gets sick and dies. FTP, identify this short story by
Nikolai Gogol about an expensive piece of outerwear. {Boston Massacre}
One of the defense attorneys involved in this event would later go on
to serve as Chief Justice of Nova Scotia, and the event had its
origins in a disputed barber’s bill. The prosecuting attorneys
included the namesake of Treat Williams, and Hugh Montgomery’s being
struck by a club was the direct cause. Depicted by Henry Pelham, the
most famous participant was a sailor formerly in the service of a
William Brown of Framingham, and other participants included Samuel
Maverick and Patrick Carr. Montgomery and Matthew Kilroy were branded
on the thumb on charges of manslaughter, and a retreat to Castle
William by the English was forced by the uproar over this event.
Captain Thomas Preston was acquitted, having been defended by John
Adams, in, FTP, what 1770 event which saw the deaths of five American
colonists, including Crispus Attucks? Robert von Ranke {Graves} This
man’s Hercules My Shipmate was set on an island at which he had a
residence at Deya. He joined the Royal Welch Fusiliers and his first
publication was his war poetry Over the Brazier. Also the writer of
biographical works on figures such as Lawrence of Arabia and
Belisarius, his autobiography detailed actions at the Battle of Loos,
where the British had foolishly advanced against heavy German gunfire.
His Seven Days in Crete expresses his views on ancient religion that
are expressed in a famous work whose title character is the center of
a cult ritual for which there is no historical evidence. The author of
Goodbye to All That and The White Goddess, FTP, name this British
author best known for a work involving Sejanus, Nero, Caligula, and
Tiberius: I, Claudius. {Sanger} degradation or sequencing This
procedure allows us to determine the number of distinct polypeptides
in a protein. Dansyl chloride and dabsyl chloride yield more
detectable derivatives than 1-fluoro-2,4-dinitrobenzene, or FDNB,
which loses a fluorine in attaching to the amino-terminus. After the
protein is hydrolyzed, the FDNB- labeled N-terminus residue is
identified, giving us phenylalanine and glycine for the two chains of
insulin. Improved upon by Edman degradation, FTP name this chemical
procedure, namesake of a two-time British Nobel prize winner who used
it to sequence insulin. Edward {Sapir} He showed that patterns in a
parent language drift into daughter languages, and used linguistic
data for historical reconstruction in his Time Perspective in
Aboriginal American Culture. Working at the Canadian National Museum,
he studied Yana and Paiute, and grouped "Central and North American
Languages" into six major divisions. A student of Boas, his papers at
Yale on "The Impact of Culture on Personality" preview his idea that
language is a "symbolic guide to behavior." FTP name this structural
linguist who wrote Language, and formulated a hypothesis with Ben
Whorf. Wayne {Brady} His first job in the entertainment industry came
playing Tigger at Orlando’s Disney World, and he began playing the
role of Billy Flynn in the Broadway production of Chicago, a role now
filled by John O’Hurley. His only major acting role came in ABC’s
production of Geppetto as the Magician, helmed by a noted cohort.
Although a multiple Emmy winner, in his most famous television
appearance, he drives an SUV that blares “La Cucaracha” when its horn
is honked, and posits a famous question after noting that “Mr.
Franklin’s lonely.” Before committing a homicide, he shouts “Break
yo’self, fool,” and demands that his passenger take angeldust. FTP,
name this former talk-show host who might just have to choke a bitch,
a long-time performer on Whose Line Is It Anyway? Agustín Cosme Damián
de {Iturbide} y Arámburu or {Agustín} I This man’s namesake half-
American grandson was the adopted heir of Archduke Maximilian and
Princess Carlota, who did not have any children of their own. After
his ouster, he lived on a healthy pension in Livorno, eventually
making his way to London, where he published his autobiography. He had
commanded Spanish troops at Puruarun and Valladolid with success, but
was charged with extortion and forced out of the Spanish army.
Returning to his home country after his exile, he was captured in Soto
la Marina and died in Padilla, just three years after signing a famous
treaty with the Spanish viceroy, O’Donoju. (OH-DOH-NO-WHO) The Plan de
Casa Mata began the movement that would lead to this man’s ouster,
issued two years after this man’s Plan of Iguala, which called for the
overthrow of the Spanish. His belief in the divine right of kings
proved catastrophic to his rule, as he lasted a mere nine months in
the position of emperor. FTP, name this Mexican independence leader
and first emperor of Mexico. {Seven Sisters} [prompt on {vysotskii},
prompt on {Pleiades}, and whatever is Indian for Seven Sisters] This
term can refer to the northeastern provinces of India, disconnected as
they are from the rest of the country, and a group of cliffs in
Sussex. The term can also be used to describe a series of buildings
including the hotels Ukraina, Leningradskaya, and the main building of
Moscow State University, once the tallest building in Europe, which
are perhaps the most notable buildings of the Stalinist style. It
refers to a group whose notable progeny include Oenomaus [EE-NO-MAY-
US], Lacedaemon, and most famously, Hermes. That group, including
Merope and Electra, would give its name to a star cluster also known
as M45 known also as the Pleiades cluster, but the most famous use of
the term may be in conjunction with institutions located in cities
such as South Hadley, Poughkeepsie, and Northampton. FTP, name this
term, which gives its name to the group of colleges including Barnard,
Smith, Vassar, and Bryn Mawr. Charlie {Parker} He got a job washing
dishes so he could listen to Art Tatum playing next door. His favorite
composer is Igor Stravinsky, and he wanted to have classical works
composed for his instrument. He emulated Henry "Buster" Smith and
toured Kansas City with pianist Jay McShann, but found the harmonic
voice he sought while playing Ray Noble's "Cherokee." He was sent to
Camarillo State Hospital after a break down while playing "Lover Man,"
suffering withdrawal from the heroin he obtained from Moose the
Mooche. Improvising on "Anthropology," "Hot House," and "Scrapple from
the Apple," FTP name this alto saxophonist who, along with Dizzy
Gillespie, founded bebop, nicknamed Bird. “The {Midnight Ride of Paul
Revere}” The night wind seems to whisper “All is well.”  An unnamed
character’s thoughts are suddenly all “bent on a shadowy something far
away”, which the author describes a few lines later as “A line of
black that bends and floats/On the rising tide like a bridge of
boats”.  Beneath the title character “Is the Mystic, meeting the ocean
tides”, and a spark lit by his steed “kindle[s] the land into flame
with its heat”.  The title character hits Medford at twelve o’clock,
Lexington at one, and Concord at two.  “Listen my children, and you
shall hear” of, FTP, what event? {calcium} Its release can be blocked
by ruthenium red and facilitated by cyclic ADP-ribose via cyclic GMP
increase, both acting on ryanodine receptors, allowing oscillations of
it to propagate in dendrites. It enters the cell as inwardly
rectifying CRAC currents via trp [TRIP] channels when its
intracellular levels are depleted by IP3-mediated release from smooth
ER. It can activate nitric oxide synthase and CaM kinase II upon
binding to calmodulin, and binds to its sensor synaptotagmin to
mediate vesicle fusion at the synapse. FTP name this +2 ion whose
influx causes the release of neurotransmitters. {Daedalus} Though he’s
not Lycaon, according to some sources, this man had a son named Iapyx,
Aeneas’ healer, who is also claimed to be the grandson of Priam. Late
in his life he came unto Cumae and then unto Sicily, where he lived
under the patronage of Cocalus, a man who would kill one of this man’s
earlier patrons. A crime committed by this man was the inspiration of
the name of the partridge, as he murdered his sister’s son,
alternatively known as Calos or Talus, but better known as Perdix.
Condemned by the Areopagus, he was arrested in his next destination
after completing a work for a daughter of Helios, Pasiphae, and due to
the lack of methods of exiting the country, he devised another means,
which led to the death of his son. FTP, name this man who devised a
wooden cow for Pasiphae and pairs of wings for himself and his son,
Icarus. Giuseppe {Garibaldi} An early incident his career involved a
plot concocted by several conspirators on the “Euridice” which sought
to occupy the Genoese arsenal. Bento Gonçalves and this man are the
namesakes of cities in the province of Rio Grande do Sul, where this
man distinguished himself as a commander in the Guerra dos Farrapos.
Late in his life, he was elected to the French National Assembly after
notable victories at Autun and Chatillon [SHAW-TEE-YOHN]. Captured by
the forces of General Cialdini after the battle of Aspromonte, he
would return to launch an offensive that would include a notable
victory at Bezzecca [BETS-EH-KAH], but he stopped short of the
Trentino on orders from his sovereign. Though he won at Calatafirmi,
he wasn’t able to defeat the Bourbon Francis II until the Battle of
Voltorno, with help from the king’s army. Thus was the conquest of the
Kingdom of the Two Sicilies achieved under the banner of King Victor
Emmanuel II. FTP, name this Italian commander most famous for his
Sicilian Campaign who commanded a group known as “The Thousand” or the
“Red Shirts.” {Han} dynasty It saw the conquest of the Xiongnu [SHOWN-
noo] by Wudi and ended when Xiandi was forced to abdicate. Zhang Qian
was sent west during this dynasty as an envoy along the route that
would become the Silk Road. Interrupted by the Xin interregnum, it saw
its last emperor yield to Cao Pi [CHOW-pee], the son of the chief
minister who became a major figure in the subsequent period. Internal
dissension took such forms as Wang Mang's rebellion, after which the
eastern period of this dynasty was established with its capital at
Luoyang. Founded by Liu Bang, it began to decline after the Yellow
Turban rebellion. Followed by the Three Kingdoms period, FTP name this
Chinese dynasty lasting from 206 BC to 220 AD, which gave its name to
the ethnic Chinese. {Brazil} The two main characters take their names
from Tristan and Iseult [IHZ- OYLT] in the 1994 John Updike novel
named for this country. In a novel by an author from this country, a
dead man who worked on a poultice to cure melancholy recounts his
postumous memoirs. In Tess of the D’Urbervilles, Angel Clare travels
to this country after rejecting Tess. Characters in two novels of
another author from this country include Baldo, who leaves his life as
a circus boxer and eventually becomes a strike organizer, and Nacib
Saad, the owner of a bar in Ilheus [IL-YAY-OOS]. Those characters
appear in the novels Jubiabá and Gabriela, Clove, and Cinnamon. FTP,
name this South American country whose authors include Jorge [ZHOR-
ZHEY] Amado and Joaquim [ZHO-A-KEEM] Maria Machado de Assis. A {Theory
of Justice} In a reaction to this work, another author wrote of the
Lockean proviso, a rule of acquisition which has a historical shadow
that can result in the loss of entitlement. The author of this work
advocates an approach differing from the ideal spectator method in
requiring unanimous agreement, and in restricting the information
available to the negotiators. It also claims that the only tolerable
economic inequalities are those which benefit the least well off, an
idea known as the difference principle. The lack of a priori knowledge
about individual traits is the veil of ignorance, a characteristic of
the original position. FTP, name this work which treats the title
concept “as fairness,” written by John Rawls. {Golgi} body or complex
or apparatus It can be stained using antibodies against thiamine
pyrophosphatase or NADPase. Addition of brefeldin A results in the
loss of its identity, and the disassembly of Sec-23/Sec-24 complexes
catalyzed by Sar-1 allows vesicles destined for it coated by COP-II to
dissolve. The completion of N-linked glycosylation and the addition of
mannose-6-phosphate to lysosomal proteins both occurs here, as
explained by Palade and Jamieson. Two models of transport through it
are the vesicular transport model and the cisternal maturation model.
A receiver of vesicles from the endoplasmic reticulum through its cis
face, FTP identify this cellular organelle consisting of stacks of
cisternae and named for an Italian biologist. {Lohengrin} The
protagonist of this opera narrates a dream in the aria “Oft in truben
Tagen,” and later sings of her happiness on the balcony of the
Kemenate, causing the wife of Friedrich to seek revenge. The king
tells his subjects that a nine-year peace with the Hungarians has
ended, and Telramund declares that he has renounced the right to marry
the main female character in favor of the scheming sorceress Ortrud.
In the aria "In fernem Land," the title character reveals his identity
to the people of Brabant and his wife Elsa. Ending with the revelation
that Ortrud had transformed Elsa's brother into a swan, FTP identify
this Wagner opera with a famous bridal chorus. {Oedipus} or {Oedipal}
complex or stage or conflict This phenomenon is attacked as an attempt
to force conformity by limiting the productivity of desire in the
first volume of Capitalism and Schizophrenia. Earlier reactions
include an Ernest Jones article utilizing it “as An Explanation of
Hamlet’s Mystery,” and a treatise postulating a phase of separation
anxiety prior to the development of this phenomenon. It was said to
originate in an act of murder in the primal horde, and the superego
was said to originate in the struggle associated with it. First
discussed in The Interpretation of Dreams as an example of wish-
fulfillment taken from Sophocles, FTP name this phase of Freudian
psychosexual development in which young boys feel sexually attracted
to their mothers. {Philip IV} the Fair or le Bel His future wife and
her mother Blanche of Artois sought refuge in his father’s court in
the same year that his father married his second wife, Marie de
Brabant. His vassal Guy de Dampierre betrayed him during a conflict
with England, and a later uprising in Guy’s lands led to a defeat of
this king’s forces at the Battle of the Golden Spurs. A crusade to
Tunisia saw the deaths of his mother and grandfather, Isabella of
Aragon and Louis IX. On October 13, 1307, he arrested all of the
Knights Templar in France and had the order disbanded using his
influence on Pope Clement V. FTP, name this Capetian king whose reign
saw the papal curia move to Avignon. {My Name Is Earl} The title
character spoiled the Sixth Sense for his ex-girlfriend, and some of
the characters central to the ambition of the title character are
Natalie, Professor Alex Meyers, Donnie Jones, and Kenny James. The
fact that the title character punched a kid at Frostburg State
University and his brother took a bus to Hagerstown suggest that it is
set in Maryland, but the only exact geographic location is the
fictitious Camden County. Giovanni Ribisi’s character Ralph, a former
cohort of the main character, has recurred in several episodes, and a
frequent meeting place is the Crab Shack, the place of Darnell’s
employ. Watching Carson Daly while in a hospital bed inspires the
title character’s change in attitude and a quest which Catalina, a
hotel maid, and Randy, the title character’s brother, abet. FTP, name
this NBC sitcom featuring a Fu Manchu-sporting title character
surnamed Hickey attempting to right his wrongs, starring Jason Lee.
{sulfuric acid }or {H2SO4} Polyalkylbenzenes undergo rearrangement
when reacted with this substance in the Jacobsen reaction. A mixture
with nitric acid produces nitronium ion, which is useful in
electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions. Commercially it may be
synthesized with the aid of nitrogen dioxide or vanadium oxide as
catalyst. It can react with rock phosphate to make superphosphate, and
can react with benzene when heated and "fuming." Industrially
synthesized by either the contact process or lead-chamber process, FTP
identify this diprotic strong acid found in lead-acid batteries. “The
{Hollow Men}” The speaker wants to “wear / Such deliberate disguises /
Rat’s coat, crowskin, crossed staves / In a field.” The setting is a
“beach of the tumid river” in a place where “the stone images / Are
raised.” The fifth section intersperses the line, “Life is very long”
from Conrad’s novel “An Outcast of the Islands” and fragments of the
Lord’s Prayer with mentions of an entity which interposes itself
“Between the motion and the act.” A second Conrad novel supplies one
of the two epigraphs, the other one being “A penny for the Old Guy.”
The world ends with a whimper in, FTP this poem about “shapes without
form” circling the prickly pear, written by T. S. Eliot. {Horus} The
god Sobek invented the fish trap in order to catch this god’s severed
hands. Hippopotami were cut up at Edfu in honor of this god, recalling
his participation in a breath-holding contest. His sons were known as
the Amenti, and presided over the canopic jars. A near-fatal snakebite
and the ripping out of his eyes were two incidents provoked by the
malice of his uncle. That uncle, the husband of this god’s aunt
Nephthys, used a specially-crafted chest to murder this god’s father.
FTP, name this god who fought against his uncle Set to avenge the
murder of his father Osiris. The {Hay Wain} The outer panels of this
triptych show a dog harassing an elderly wayfarer on the Path of Life.
The interior progresses from the Creation and Fall of Man on the left
wing to the center, which shows a procession led by demons heading
into Hell on the right wing. A later painting of this name used a
drawing by John Dunthorne as a model for the title object. The central
panel of the triptych shows a group of nuns stuffing a bag with the
title commodity and a group of princes following the title conveyance.
Willy Lott’s cottage appears in the later painting, which shows the
title object crossing a stream of the Stour River. FTP, give the
shared name of a Bosch triptych and a Constable painting, both of
which feature a harvest wagon. Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of
the {Wealth of Nations} In a similarly-titled 1984 update of this
work, Jane Jacobs argued for a focus on cities as the relevant units.
This work claims that “A person who can acquire no property, can have
no other interest but to eat as much, and to labour as little as
possible,” as an argument for abandoning slavery. Its author began
writing it while serving as tutor to the son-in-law of Charles
Townshend, who was impressed by a previous work emphasizing the human
capacity for sympathy with other people’s circumstances, The Theory of
Moral Sentiments. Noted for arguing that self-interested individuals
tend to act towards the general good of the market as though “led by
an invisible hand,” FTP name this treatise written by Adam Smith. The
{Wild Duck} Characters in this work include a fourteen year old girl
who enjoys looking at the pictures in “Harrison’s History of London,”
a book left behind by an old sea captain who was known as the Flying
Dutchman. One of the girl’s neighbors, a theology student who believes
he is demonically possesed, sometimes reads with her to help spare her
failing eyesight. The news that the owner of the Hoidal mines is going
blind and a letter delivered by Mrs. Sorby detailing a generous
bequest to the girl raise suspicions that Hedvig may be the daughter
of Hakon Werle, not Hialmar Ekdal. FTP, name this Ibsen play in which
Hedvig shoots herself rather than sacrifice the titular waterfowl.
{Constitutional Union} Party It failed to nominate William Graham and
the man who authorized military intervention in the Regulator-
Moderator War at its first convention, instead selecting a former
Congressman who preceded James K. Polk as Speaker of the House on the
second ballot. Calling for "the enforcement of the laws," this party
derisively called the "Old Gentleman's" or "Do Nothing" party only won
the states of Virginia, Kentucky, and Tennessee with a ticket that
included the orator whose speech preceded Lincoln's at Gettysburg.
Consisting of remnants of the Whig and Know-Nothing parties, FTP
identify this short-lived political party, established by a committee
led by Crittenden, that won the smallest percentage of the popular
vote in the election of 1860 with its ticket of Edward Everett and
John Bell. {arabesque} It is the title of a Stanley Donen follow-up to
Charade starring Sophia Loren and the much-too-old Gregory Peck. It
also names a C major work for piano by Robert Schumann and two works
for piano written in the keys of E major and G major by Claude
Debussy. As its plural, it gives its name to a collection of short
stories, including one whose title character Poprishchin thinks he is
King Frederick VIII of Spain. In addition to a collection including
"Nevsky Prospekt" and "Diary of a Madman" by Gogol, this word is
paired with "grotesque" in a collection of short stories that includes
"The Man that was Used Up" and "The Fall of the House of Usher" by
Edgar Allan Poe. FTP, identify the common word that also names a
ballet position in which the dancer balances on one leg with the other
leg pointed straight back. Siméon-Denis {Poisson} He lends his name to
a bilinear map, some of whose singularities give rise to conserved
quantities known as Casimirs. He gives his name to a quantity given by
the first Lamé constant over 2 times the sum of the Lamé constants,
and to a phenomenon he showed was predicted by Fresnel’s wave theory
of light. His namesake equation is an inhomogeneous generalization of
Laplace’s equation. A kurtosis of one over the mean and variance equal
to the mean characteristize his namesake distribution. FTP, name this
Frenchman whose namesake distribution gives the probability of a
certain number of successes in a fixed time period for a given rate of
success. {Mahavira} Once, rather than shaving, he tore his hair out by
the roots. Fragrant Mandara flowers, the ocean of milk, and a fire fed
by sacrificial butter were the subjects of three of the sixteen dreams
portending his birth. He was born to two followers of Lord Parshva
after being transferred from Devananda’s womb to Trisala’s womb. Some
believe he was given a white robe by Indra after casting off his
clothes. This occurred after he fasted for two and a half days under
an Asoka tree, obtaining enlightenment. He shared his knowledge by
preaching for seven days before dying, stressing the absolute
prohibition on killing. FTP, name this twenty-fourth tirthankara, the
last great teacher of Jainism. Gustav {Holst} The composition of one
of his most famous works, originally written for piano duet, was
interrupted by this composer's writing of the a cappella Nunc
Dimittis. Spiritual works by this composer of Short Festival Te Deum
include a work based on the Apocryphal Acts of St. John, the Hymn of
Jesus, and four groups of Choral Hymns from the Rig Veda. He also set
Walt Whitman's Ode to Death and Dirge for Two Veterans to music. The
finale to one of his works features folk tunes "The Dargason" and
"Greensleeves." Another work concludes with a wordless women's chorus
and opens with a fast march in 5/4 time. FTP identify this composer of
Egdon Heath, St. Paul's Suite, and The Planets. {division of labor}
(accept {in society} as an add-on) It is by virtue of this that "man
is distinguished from animals," according to Ludwig von Mises [MEE-
say] in Liberalism. He goes on to say that this has "made feeble man.
. .the lord of the earth." Along with extensive use of machinery, it
was blamed for the proletarians losing all individual character in
their work in The Communist Manifesto, though Karl Marx differentiates
between the natural "social" type and the deleterious "manufacture"
type. In Book Three of a namesake 1893 work, its abnormal forms --
including forced and anomic -- are outlined; and, in the first chapter
of The Wealth of Nations, Adam Smith uses a pin factory to describe
it. For 10 points, name this separation of work into tasks performed
by specialized units, whose manifestation "in society" was examined by
Emile Durkheim [AY- meel DUR-kime]. {Darius III} (accept {Codommanus};
prompt on partial answer) His reputation for bravery was based on
killing a Cadusian warrior- champion in single combat, for which he
was awarded the satrapy [SAA-truh-pee] of Armenia. His depiction on a
mosaic in the House of the Faun in Pompeii shows a different aspect to
his character. He ascended to the throne after his two predecessors
were poisoned by Bagoas. Bagoas was, in turn, poisoned by this man,
whose own death came at the hands of the satrap Bessus. The death of
Memnon, his general, left this man limited militarily; but he also
showed poor judgment in not preparing for Granicus, and in bringing
his relatives to another doomed battle. In that battle, famously
painted by Albrecht Altdorfer, this man abandoned his family in
retreat. For 10 points, name this last Achamaenid [AH-kuh-MAY-nid]
ruler of Persia, who decisively lost to Alexander at Gaugamela and
Issus. Ruben {Dario} [roo-BEN dar-EE-yoh] or Felix Ruben Garcia
{Sarmiento} (accept {To Roosevelt} before "born in") "You are an
Alexander-Nebuchadnezzar [NEH-buh-kahd-NEH-zer]/ breaking horses and
murdering tigers/ (You are a Professor of Energy/ as today's madmen
say)," he wrote in a poem to a U. S. president. Born in Metapa, a city
now renamed in his honor, he read his poem "The Book" to his country's
president, Joaquin [wah-KEEN] Zavala, at age 15 to get a scholarship
to Europe. That failed, but he became his country's ambassador to
Paris in 1903 and was also an ambassador to Argentina. In the latter
position, he wrote the collection Profane Hymns, while in the former,
under the influence of French Symbolist poets, he wrote Songs of Life
and Hope. For 10 points, name this Nicaraguan poet of "To Roosevelt"
and "In Autumn," whose collection Azul [ah-ZOOL] helped usher in the
literary movement he originated, Modernismo [moh-dare-NEEZ-moh].
{abracadabra} The first known reference to it is in De Medicina
Praecepta [pry-KEP-tuh], by Serenus Sammonicus, physician to Caracalla
[CAR-uh-CAHL-uh]. He had patients wear an amulet on which it was
written in the form of an inverted cone. Possible sources for it
include corruptions of the Aramaic phrase meaning "I create as I
speak," or a combination of the Hebrew words for "Father," "Son," and
"Holy Spirit:" ab, ben, and ruakh ha-kodesh [ROO-ahkh hah-koh-DESH].
This word was the leading original candidate for the title of the
Beatles' Revolver album, and was the title of an album by the Steve
Miller Band, as well as the song in which they wanted to "reach out
and grab ya." For 10 points, give this 11-letter nonsense word,
similar-sounding to a dangerous Harry Potter spell, that is often
associated with magicians. {auxin}s Via the proteins TIR-1 and ARF-1,
many of the effects of this class of substances are mediated by gene
transcription. The first of these was isolated by Fritz Went [vent] in
Avena seedlings, where he cut the coleoptile [coh-lee- OP-tul] from
oat plants, placed it in agar, then replaced it on the plants.
Synthetic types like 2,4-D acetic acid are used in weed killers,
though the most common natural form, indole-3-acetic-acid, or IAA, can
have a different effect. Produced in the apical [AY-pih-kul] meristem,
these substances are the prime factor in apical dominance, as they
build up in the shoot apex at the leading tips of stalks. For 10
points, name these plant hormones that cause the curvature in
phototropism, and whose most important function is in plant growth.
{Protagoras} With a comparison to girls entertaining at a party only
when the partygoers cannot entertain themselves, the title character
is admonished for avoiding the main question and, instead, examining a
poem by Simonides [sye- MAHN-ih-deez] -- an examination that hinges on
the difference between "being" and "becoming" good. Pursuing the main
question, the title character compares the parts of excellence to
features on a face, while his principal antagonist argues they are not
distinct, but, instead, all follow from knowledge, since no one
deliberately does evil. The antagonist had sought Hippocrates at the
gathering, to find out if he was spending his money wisely to learn
excellence from, for 10 points, the title character of which Platonic
dialogue that is largely a conversation between Socrates and a
prominent sophist? {Psycho} Tom Cassidy's $40,000 -- meant to "buy off
unhappiness" by purchasing his daughter a house as a wedding present
-- sets the plot in motion, as it travels toward Fairvale from
Phoenix, stopping briefly at California Charlie's. It is carried by a
woman seeking her lover, the hardware store owner Sam Loomis. The
woman is later sought by her sister, Lila [LYE-luh], and the detective
Arbogast. Scored only with strings, to match its black-and-white
photography, this film supposedly features the first flushing toilet
in American cinema, used by Marion Crane to get rid of some paper
shortly before a fateful encounter, in the same room, with the mother
of a young man she just met. Man and "mother" are the same person in,
for 10 points, which Alfred Hitchcock film, where Marion would have
been better off not meeting Norman or taking a shower at the Bates
Motel? {prime}s or {prime} numbers The procedures of Pratt and Atkin-
Goldwater-Kilian-Morain certify them. AKS and Lucas-Lehmer are
deterministic tests for them, while Miller's test is probabilistic,
meaning it can also detect their pseudo-counterparts. Shanks and
Cunningham are chains of them, and ones in a Cunningham chain of the
first kind are the Sophie Germain type. Ones that divide the class
number of a cyclotomic field generated by e to the 2-pi-i over
themselves are irregular, and odd irregular ones also divide the
numerator of certain Bernoulli numbers, while Ferrier's was the
largest one known before the advent of electronic computers. For 10
points, name this class of numbers, all of which greater than four are
the sum of two others, by the strong Goldbach conjecture; and which
may only be factored by one and themselves. {dithyramb}s [DITH-ih-
ramz] In the poem with this name, the questions "How should a mere
worldling regale you, chorus divine?" and "Gods! what can mortals give
to you, truly?" are asked by Friedrich Schiller [SHIL-er]. In general,
this term names a class a poems, of which John Dryden's "Alexander's
Feast" is often cited as a later example. Traditionally developed by
Arion, two of the ones by Bacchylides [baa-KIL-uh-deez] survive,
including "Ode 18," which separates a soloist from the chorus.
Composed for groups of 50 men and boys, and sung in competition, these
are, for 10 points, which song-chants, which stand in contrast to the
more somber Apollonian paeans [PAY-ahnz] and are tributes to Dionysus
[DYE-oh- NYE-sis]? USA {PATRIOT} Act (accept early {House Resolution
3162} or equivalents) Section 201 amended Title III to include new
offenses, while Section 216 codified arguments used to support the
implementation of the Carnivore system. Section 216 also allowed for
expanded "pen registers," and Sections 206 and 218 added to the reach
of 1978's FISA [FYE-suh]. The subject of House Resolution 3162, it was
primarily drafted by Viet Dinh and introduced by James Sensenbrenner.
Four years later in the senate, John Sununu [soo-NOO-noo] -- by
introducing an adjunct bill of compromises -- broke a stalemate over
its renewal. The opposition quadrupled, however, as Tom Harkin, Jim
Jeffords, and Robert Byrd voted no on the adjunct bill, along with the
only senator to originally oppose this act, Russ Feingold [FINE-gold].
For 10 points, name this 2001 act to "[Unite] and [Strengthen] America
by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct
Terrorism." {ex post facto} laws (or {retrospective} law) (do not
accept early "bill (or act) of attainder") In Yrttiaho [IR-tee-AH-ho]
v. Public Curator (Queensland), the Australian High Court determined
that ones of these related to "merely procedural" matters, as opposed
to those which divested rights, were not prohibited. A similar
distinction by the U. S. Supreme Court limited their prohibition to
criminal, rather than private, rights in Calder v. Bull. Forbidden by
Article I, Section 9, Clause 3 of the U. S. Constitution, they were
key to the Ex parte [PAR-tay] Garland case, where post-Civil War
loyalty oaths were called these, as well as bills of attainder. With
their forbiddance following from the legal phrase nulla poena sine
lege [NUH-luh PAY-nuh SEE-nuh LAY-juh], or "no punishment without
law," these are, for 10 points, which kind of laws, which
retroactively change the legal consequences for an action, and have a
Latin name meaning "from things done afterward?" {Baha'i} faith
(prompt on early "Kitab-i-Aqdas") According to its founder's grandson,
its most important tablet, along with the Surih of the Temple, was
ordered written in the shape of a pentacle, to signify the temple of
man. Its holiest book -- written soon after its spiritual founder was
transferred to the house of Udi Khammar -- sets its year to begin on
March 21st, dividing it into 19 months of 19 days each. The book also
prescribes the mandatory 19 days of fasting to those between 15 and
70, and establishes the Nineteen Days Feasts. It exhorts the
Presidents of the Republics of the American continent to champion
justice; reproofs Francis Joseph; and ordains the House of Justice,
now located in Haifa [HYE-fuh]. This is how the Kitab-i-Aqdas [kih-TAB
ee AHK-dahs] is described by Shoghi [SHO- ghee] Effendi. For 10
points, name this religion, where Effendi was the grandson and
appointed successor of its Iranian founder, Baha 'Ullah. {Gold Digger}
The narrator's psychic compared the woman he is looking for to Serena.
That desired woman may be the "cutie the bomb" he met at a beauty
salon, who carried a baby Louis Vitton [VEE-tahn] under her underarm.
The narrator later tells a cautionary tale about a man who is on TV
any given Sunday, winning the Super Bowl and driving off in a Hyundai
[HUN-day]. His baby momma was supposed to buy his shortie Tyco
["tie"-koh] with his money, but instead went and got lipo [LYE-po]
with his money. Backed by Jamie Foxx singing a modified sample of Ray
Charles's "I Got a Woman," the narrator tells the titular type of
woman -- whose car and crib are bigger than her man's -- to "get
down." If you ain't no punk, holla "we want pre-nup!" and, for 10
points, name this song about money-hungry females, from 2005's Late
Registration album by Kanye [KAHN-yay] West. A {Stag at Sharkey's} In
the lower left, a man looks to his left to speak to someone, while in
the lower right, another man looks at someone over his left shoulder.
The most prominent figure in the rear peeks up over the raised floor
on which the main action is taking place. The expected ropes appear to
the right and behind the main action, but are missing in front,
allowing for a clearer view. Each combatant in this two-tone painting
appears to be standing momentarily on one leg, with their other legs
nearly connecting. The one on the right has his right gloved hand out,
seeming to punch the nearby referee in the head. For 10 points, name
this 1909 painting of an illegal boxing match, perhaps the best known
work of George Bellows. {Cry, the Beloved Country} (prompt on early
"Stephen Kumalo") At the end of Book I, Mr. Carmichael announces that
he will take a case pro deo [DAY-oh], which gratifies the main
character. That main character lies twice: once on a train, when he
says he has been to his ultimate destination before; and once to hurt
his brother John, when he says that a spy in his brother's political
organization might bring him harm. His brother's son, Matthew, and
Johannes Pafuri, were with the main character's son, Absalom, when
Absalom murdered an engineer, whose father, James Jarvis, lives near
the main character's village. The main character -- an umfundisi [OOM-
foon-DEEZ- eh] who went looking for his son -- brings his son's wife
and child back home to Ndotsheni [EEN-do-SHEH-nee], in Natal [nuh-
TAHL], to live a quiet life. For 10 points, name this novel, set
principally in Johannesburg, about the trials of Stephen Kumalo, by
Alan Paton [PAY-tun]. {Michelson [MYE-kul-sun]-Morley} Experiment
(accept {Michelson interferometer} before "confirmed its results")
[named after Albert Abraham Michelson and Edward Williams Morley] In a
rotating variation of it, Georges Sagnac [SAHN-yahk] discovered a
namesake effect. The Kennedy-Thorndike experiment confirmed its
results 35 years later. Its results were also confirmed by observing
the change in orientation, or lack of change, in a parallel-plate
capacitor in the Trouton- Noble experiment. Dayton Miller worked on
Mount Wilson with one of its namesakes to try to show that entrainment
may have led to its result, while George FitzGerald [fitz-GEHR-uld]
explained its null result by a physical contraction. Its central
device, floated in a pool of mercury, could detect a shift of one-one-
hundredth of a fringe, much finer than the one-twenty-fifth that would
have been shown by a positive result. For 10 points, name this 1887
experiment which used an interferometer [IN-ter-fur-AH-muh-ter] to try
to detect the luminiferous aether [loo-min-NIH-fur-us EE-ther].
{Philoctetes} The son of King Poeas of Meliboea, in a play named for
this man, Odysseus attempts to persuade Neoptolemus into tricking this
man out of his most famous posession. Thomas Russell imagined his
exile in Suppos’d to Be Written on Lemnos, and at the base of Mt.
Oeta, this man lit the funeral pyre of a great hero, in return for
which he received a gift. More famously, this man’s presence in the
Achaen camp was due to the fact that Helenus had prophesied that Troy
would not fall until the bow and arrow of Herarcles were obtained,
which belonged to this man, who was left on Lemnos after being bitten
by a snake. For ten points, identify this archer of Greek myth, best
known for killing Paris during the Trojan war. {Scrappy} Doo , In one
series starring this character, the actions take place in the town of
Tumbleweed and Deputy Dusty seems to always be making chili for Yabba
and this character. Another show featured a hunt caused by the idiocy
of Weerd and Bogel, a show featuring the jumpsuit-clad Flim Flam and
Vincent Van Ghoul, as well as this character’s uncle. He consistently
threatened to splat people, and he apparently was manipulating the
robot Mondavarious in a noted Freddie Prinze, Jr. vehicle. Beginning
his most famous phrase with an imitation of a bugle playing “Charge!”,
FTP, name this “Puppy Power” proponent, the nephew of Scooby Doo.
{partition} functions In quantum mechanics, it can be given as the
trace of the exponent of minus beta times the Hamiltonian. For Ising
and Potts models, this quantity corresponds to the largest eigenvalue
of the transfer operator, and it can be derived by maximizing the log
of the number of states available to the system. The average number of
particles in a system is proportional to the logarithmic derivative of
this quantity with respect to chemical potential, and this quantity’s
logarithm times Boltzmann’s constant times temperature gives the
Helmholtz free energy. Equivalent to the sum over all the Boltzmann
factors of a system, for ten points, identify this thermodynamic
function which gives all the statistical properties of the system.
{Congress of Vienna} or {Wiener Kongress} Carl Löwenhielm [LUH-VEN-
HEELM], the Marquis of Labrador, the Earl of Clancarty and the Count
of Palmela were among the men involved in this event. One of the men
was “near seven foot high, deaf as a post,” and among the territorial
changes were the creation of the Duchy of Lucca, the establishment of
Marie-Louise in Parma, and the union of Norway to Sweden. The Illyrian
Provinces were regained by the host, and Avignon stayed French. The
Duchy of Warsaw reverted to Russian control, and Castlereagh proposed
a Congress system. FTP, these events happened at what congress
attended by Talleyrand and led by Metternich, hosted in the Hapsburg
capital. Robert {Merton} Name’s the same. One wrote Science,
Technology, and Society in Seventeenth Century England and studied the
sociology of science before venturing into latent dysfunctions. The
other studied continuous time finance with Paul Samuelson and served
on the board of Long Term Capital Management. One worked with Paul
Lazarsfeld in writing Social Theory and Social Structure, while the
other relaxed the assumptions in the Black-Scholes model of options
pricing, and won a Nobel prize. FTP give the shared name of this
father and son duo of sociologist and economist, the older of whom
redefined anomie and coined the terms “role model” and “self-fulling
prophecy.” {Love in the Time of Cholera} It begins with the death of
Jeremiah Saint-Amour, who kills himself to avoid growing old. The
tabloids incorrectly claim Lucretia had an affair with one of the main
characters, although he does have an affair with Barbara Lynch. His
mother makes his wife take harp lessons and eat eggplant, and finally
dies when they are in Europe. He himself dies after trying to retrieve
his pet parrot from a mango tree, opening up the path for a
relationship that ended suddenly after Fermina saw Florentino in the
Arcade of the Scribes. Over fifty-one years later, the captain of the
riverboat they finally consummate their love on raises the yellow flag
in, FTP, what novel by Gabriel Garcia Marquez? {Pontiac}’s Rebellion
The Paxton boys perpetrated what is known as the “Conestoga massacre”
in response to this event. Robert Rogers wrote a play about the chief
participant subtitled “Or the Savages of America.” Among the forts
taken were Ouiatenon, Presque Isle, and St. Joseph, and Simon Ecuyer,
captain at Fort Pitt, perpetrated a famous act against that fort’s
besiegers. Featuring the Battle of Bushy Run, it saw the British use a
strategy of infecting blankets with smallpox in order to infirm the
Indians. Involving a famous siege of Fort Detroit, FTP, name this
Indian rebellion begun in 1763 by a man who shares his name with an
American car company. {stack} This data structure is employed to solve
the convex hull problem by the Graham’s scan algorithm. Used to
implement depth-first search, it is built directly in hardware by
processors of the MuP21 and the Harris RTX lines. Its array
implementation doesn’t require wrap-arounds, and its most natural
implementation via linked lists requires only one extra pointer. Used
in compilers and reverse Polish notation checkers, it is associated
with methods like push and pop.  FTP name this data structure defined
by the principle of last-in, first-out, a bit easier to build than a
queue. The {Rape of Lucrece} Several stanzas in this poem refer to the
siege and eventual fall of Troy, as recalled in a picture once seen by
the title character.  The lines “First red as roses that on lawn we
lay, Then white as lawn, the roses took away”, as well as many other
allusions to red, white, and roses, evoke the Wars of the Roses.
Although Collatine boasts of the title character’s chastity, her
“azure veins”, “alabaster skin”, “coral lips”, and “snow-white dimpled
chin” are more than enough to tempt Tarquin into committing the title
act.  FTP, identify this long poem by William Shakespeare about a sex
crime committed during Roman times. {I and Thou} or {Ich und Du} The
first part of this work addresses “basic words and the modes of
experience,” after defining which, the author makes “arguments for the
primacy of relation.” Franz Rosenzweig remarked after reading this
work that it “wrongs the It,” and in the final section of this work
the author addresses the question of “what religion is not.” Aphorisms
15 through 17 address the issue of “revelation through action,” after
which man is released from duty and obligation due to being filled
with responsibility, and the titular mode of interaction is also
claimed to be how man relates to God. Most famously expounding on the
dialogic principle created by its author, for ten points, identify
this work in 59 aphorisms which divides relations into the I-It and
the titular kind, the most famous philosophical work of Martin Buber.
Jules-Emile-Frederic {Massenet} Fyodor Chaliapin sang the titular bass
part in his 1910 Don Quixote, and his The Woman of Navarre shows the
influence of verismo on this composer’s style. His cantata David
Rizzio won him the Prix de Rome and his first opera was a one-act
composition about the Marquis de Kedrel called The Great-Aunt. His
1873 oratorio Marie-Magdeleine was also later performed as an opera,
and he drew on literary sources in such operas as Werther and Le
jongleur de Notre-Dame, but is best remembered for such characters as
Athanael, Nicias, Pousette, Guillot de Morfontaine, and the Chevalier
des Grieux. For ten points, identify this French composer, best
remembered for two operas based on the works of Anatole France and
Antoine Prevost, Thais and Manon. {Notes from} the {Underground} or
{Letters from} the {Underworld} or {Memoirs from a Dark Cellar} (as
this is Russian, we will employ the Kaplan Rule and accept finitely
many “a” and “the”) Flashbacks in this work’s second part, entitled
“Apropos of the Wet Snow”, include the main character obsessing over
whether to yield the right of way to a soldier, following former
schoolmates to a dinner where he is not wanted, and fantasizing about
rescuing a prostitute. That prostitute, Liza, rejects the nameless
protagonist’s offer of money after she realizes his speeches clash
with his reality. Beginning “I am a sick man…I am a spiteful man”,
FTP, identify this 1864 short work about a retired civil servant in
St. Petersburg, written by Dostoevsky. {B} cells Continuous Pax5
expression is required for their progenitors to develop from
hematopoietic stem cells, due to the need for negative regulation.
They undergo class switching, producing membrane-bound or secreted
versions of proteins depending on the C-H coding sequences.
Characterized by the presence of CD20 on their membranes, they undergo
clonal selection, producing Ig-M early and Ig-D late in humoral immune
response. Specializing into plasma and memory cells, FTP name this
class of lymphocytes that are activated by helper T cells, and that
are produced in the bone marrow. {Madonna of the Harpies} The contract
for this work stated that it would depict St. John the Evangelist and
St. Bonaventure, but the final version replaces Bonaventure with St.
Francis. Two puti can be seen in the background grasping the legs of
the titular figure, which holds a book braced against her left thigh.
One possible interpretation of this work is that it takes its
inspiration from the Book of Revelations, depicting the first titular
figure as triumphant over the titular creatures, as represented by her
standing on a pedestal which on which two carvings of those creatures
flank the hymn to Our Lady of the Assumption. Painted as part of an
altarpiece for San Francesco dei Macci, for ten points, identify this
painting depicting the Virgin with child that is known for the
mythical beasts depicted on the pedestal, the most famous painting of
Andrea Del Sarto. Zahir-ud-din Mohammed {Babur} or {Baber} Described
by Nanak as a “messenger of death,” he allied with Mirza Husain but
could not reclaim his original homeland despite the death of Mohammed
Shaybani fighting the Safavids, returning in defeat despite Ismail’s
assistance. He defeated the brother of a more famous rival at Ghagra,
and Silhadi’s treachery allowed him to win the day at Khanwa against
the Rajput ruler of Mewar. More famous for his exploits against
Ibrahim Lodi, FTP, name this victor at Panipat and founder of the
Mughal Empire. {Marduk} He is first mentioned in the text in which he
appears when the minister Gaga is instructed to prepare a feast for
this deity. Following his most famous exploits, this god is said to
have “founded the station of Nibir,” and the seventh section of the
text in which he appears commands his names to be remembered and
addresses him as “bestower of planting” and “founder of sowing.”
Called forth by Ansar, this god’s most famous shrines were in Esagila
and Etemenanki, and following his most important victory, he takes the
Tablets of Destiny from Kingu. Also known as “lord” or “Bel,” for ten
points, identify this Babylonian deity whose victory over Tiamat is
related in the Enuma Elish. {Colombia} Among its islands are the
islands of Providencia and San Andres, located off of the Nicaraguan
coast. Its southernmost city is Leticia, which is its only port on its
continent’s largest river. Its northernmost point is the Guajira [GWA-
hee-rah] Peninsula and in its northwest, part of the Darien Gap can be
found. Its Cauca [COW-kah] river valley is home to important cities
such as Popayan, Armenia, Cali, and Medellin. FTP, name this large
South American country whose Andean capital is Bogota. {phase
transition}s They have been observed in the number partitioning
problem. A local approach to studying them applies the Ornstein-
Zernike equation, while the Kadanoff-Wilson theory of them is based on
renormalization and scale invariance. They exhibit universality across
different systems, and are observed in the Kosterlitz-Thouless effect.
The Ehrenfest classification of them has been modified by Landau, who
pointed out the symmetry breaking involved and posited order
parameters for describing the system below the critical temperature.
Ferromagnetic and superfluidic are second order examples of, FTP these
changes in state of matter exemplified by deposition, sublimation, and
melting. {Orlando} You would say her name at once if you see a ship in
full sail coming with the sun on it proudly sweeping across the
Mediterranean from the South Seas. Taken care of by Basket the butler
and Stubbs the gardener who had no finger nails, she won Burdett
Coutt's Memorial Prize, she had been working on her poem for 300
years, while Lord Palmerston's lawsuit settlement finally pronounced
her Turkish marriage annulled, her estate entailed, and her sex
indisputably, and beyond the shadow of a doubt, female. FTP name this
woman as tolerant and free-spoken as a man, and a man as strange and
subtle as a woman, the subject of a Virginia Woolf biography. The
{Luck of Roaring Camp} The title character in this story finds a song
about the exploits of the ship Arethusa, sung by the ex-Australian
colonist “Man o’ War Jack” to be rather soothing. Cockney Simmons
describes the atmosphere after the arrival of the title character as
“‘evingly,” and the arrival improves the hygienic habits of the man
known as Kentuck. A major debate concerns the naming of the title
character, originally known pejoratively by such as names as that
“damned little cuss,” and Thomas is settled upon as the given name. An
ass is given the maternal role and Stumpy is given the paternal role,
and the character John Oakhurst, famous from another of the author’s
stories, is mentioned in passing. Cherokee Sal, the only woman around,
dies when giving birth to a child in FTP, what Bret Harte short story
about a California miners’ camp. The {Mau Mau }(accept early Land
Freedom Army) This group was finally unbanned in September 2003, 4
years after first seeking restitution from the British government for
their time spent in detention camps. Also known as the “Land Freedom
Army”, their attacks on settlers like the Ruck family and the
villagers of Lari led to a crackdown resulting in more than 1,000
hangings over a 4 year period. Those hanged included Dedan Kamathi,
their last leader, whose 1957 execution effectively ended their
rebellion 6 years before their nation received its independence. FTP
who was this group of Kikuyu militants who rebelled in Kenya? The
{Ambassadors }(Accept {“Jean de Dinteville and Georges de Selve}”
before they are mentioned) A silver crucifix peeks out from behind
green floral drapes, a reminder of spiritual devotion amidst a
preponderance of worldly objects. On display are traditional and
polyhedral sundials, a navigational quadrant, a torquetum, celestial
and earthly globes, a compass, a square, books, and musical
instruments. Juxtaposed with these tools of exploration is a lute with
a broken string and an anamorphic projection of a human skull,
reminders of mortality. Completing the scene are Frenchmen Jean de
Dinteville and Georges de Selve, eminent figures depicted in which
painting by Hans Holbein, the Younger? {Amazon}s Excavations at
Ordzhonikidze and the Gate of Peoples yield evidence of their
existence. The Caucasus Mountains were once named for one of their
leaders, and Clete, another of them, founded a namesake city in Italy.
In his “Aithiopis”, Arktinos of Miletos describes the exploits of one
of their leaders, who supposedly brought twelve followers to Troy.
Diodorus claimed they originated from Libya, but Herodotus claimed
they lived near the Scythians, where interbreeding produced the
Samartians. Their most important leaders were the offspring of the
incestuous liaisons of Otrere and her father Ares, and their capital
was Themyskira. Led by Hippolyta and Antiope, FTP who were these
warrior women of Greek myth? Neil Patrick {Harris} or {N.P.H.} He once
did a cross-over cameo on “Roseanne” portraying the character for
which he is still most famous, and among the roles in this man’s Dark
Ages was a turn as a gay man in John Schlesinger’s The Next Best
Thing. He played Henry McNeeley to Tony Shalhoub’s Ian Stark in a
brief NBC series about his relation with an idiosyncratic writer, and
pulled a memorable turn in Starship Troopers before a brief appearance
as Lance in Undercover Brother. His most memorable recent appearance
featured him stealing a car, after demanding that a titular quest be
derailed for lapdances and poontang, but he made good by buying
everybody burgers at White Castle at the movie’s end. Now portraying
confirmed bachelor Barney on How I Met Your Mother, FTP, name this
actor most famous for portraying Doogie Howser. {dining philosophers}
problem; prompt on “concurrency” One way to solve this problem
requires imposing a priority order on the resources. Dekker’s
algorithm and Peterson’s algorithm are mutex-based techniques for
solving it, which can also involve the use of semaphores. It can lead
to deadlock or starvation if incorrect solutions break the rules of
mutual exclusion. It describes a scenario where five individuals must
feed themselves from a single platter of spaghetti which is served and
eaten by picking up and utilizing two of five distributed forks. FTP
identify this classic problem in computer science devised by Edsger
Dijkstra, which involves a group of thoughtful participants trying to
use chopsticks. The {Faerie Queene} The protagonist of this work comes
to his senses after seeing the sign of the Virgin on Guyon's armor.
After slaying a woman in a serpent's body, the protagonist leaves his
charge due to the machinations of the wizard Archimago, and succumbs
to the giant Orgoglio, who makes Duessa his mistress, until Arthur
frees him to reunite with Una and kill the dragon Errour. Florimell is
pursued by a lustful forester, and Amoret is freed from defilement by
Britomart. Calidore tames the Blatant Beast for the court of Gloriana
in, FTP this incomplete 12 book epic poem by Edmund Spenser. {Congo
Republic} or {Republic of }(the){ Congo} (prompt on {Congo}, do not
accept any thing with “democracy”) The namesake of this nation’s
capital, an explorer and nobleman from Udine [OOH-DEE-NAY], negotiated
a treaty with a chief named Makoko to establish a settlement
originally known as Ntamo, which became this modern nation’s capital.
The large island of Bamu is contained wholly within this country, and
the nation’s borders with its eastern neighbor are roughly two rivers,
one of which is the Ubangi [OOH-BAHN-GHEE]. Its 2nd-largest city is
the country’s largest port, located near the border with the Angolan
exclave of Cabinda. Its capital gives its name to a 1944 declaration
drafted by the Free French and France’s African possessions, and the
aforementioned port is Pointe-Noire. Bordered on the southeast by its
namesake river, this is FTP, what country with capital at Brazzaville
that shares its eastern border with a noted former Belgian colony.
Lord Horatio Herbert {Kitchener} The largest city named for this man
gained its name in 1916 when the local government changed it from
Berlin in the interests of patriotism. During World War I, he had
proposed an invasion of Alexandretta, but eventually was persuaded by
the Gallipoli partisans, and he died aboard a ship that struck a mine
off the Orkneys. He received a wound at Handub in his capacity as
commander at Suakin, and succeeded Lord Grenfell in one of his more
famous posts. In a later war, he commanded troops in the Paardeberg
campaign, succeeding Lord Roberts as commander in chief of the armies
fighting that war. As the sirdar, his expeditionary force was
successful at Ferket, and subsequently at Atbara, building railroads
all the while, and most celebratedly, at Omdurman, after which he was
named a baron. Also the commanding officer in the Boer War, FTP, name
this British general who finally quashed the Mahdist rebellion in the
Sudan. {Arrow}'s {Impossibility }Theorem Amartya Sen criticized it for
its implicit assumption that the utility functions of different
individuals were incomparable, and that therefore only ordinal
preferences could be used as input. Gibbard and Satterthwaite replaced
several of its axioms by one requiring nonmanipulability of the system
in question, but still reached the same final conclusion. First
popularized in the 1951 book “Social Choice and Individual Values”,
the original version of this result had axioms including transitivity
and independence of irrelevant alternatives. FTP what is this result
that states that the only voting system satisfying certain axioms is a
dictatorship? John Millington {Synge} Lines by this author such as “A
line of chosen females, standing in their shifts” helped stir
objections to his plays, as did his depiction of loose moraled women
like Nora Burke from his “The Shadow of the Glen”. That play was based
on folklore he heard during his stay in the Aran Islands, a stay which
also inspired his tale of Maurya, the woman who loses her husband and
all five of her sons in Riders to the Sea. FTP name this Irish
playwright of Playboy of the Western World? {Brownian} motion or
movement It was treated as an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process by a French
physicist, who also derived its root-mean-squared displacement as a
function of the square-root of time. It assumes Gaussian noise and
Markov dynamics, and is described by the Langevin equation. Its almost
surely nowhere differentiable paths are described in terms of the
Wiener measure, and Jean Perrin used it to estimate Avogadro's number
using the kinetic theory's estimate for the number of collisions
undergone by a given particle, and in particular the random imbalance
of those collisions over short periods of time. A Fokker-Planck
equation was used by Albert Einstein, who first explained it. FTP name
this stochastic process describing the path of drifting pollen grains.
Citadel of {Mycenae} (Accept Palace of Mycenae) The first excavations
at this site were administered by Pittakis in 1841, although its most
famous surveyor would come some thirty years later. Like other
citadels in the area, its surrounding walls were believed to have been
constructed by the Cyclops, due to their massive and crude assemblage.
Important finds include the Grave Circle, containing six royal shaft
graves, an apotropaic Lion Gate, and the Tholos Tomb known as the
Treasury of Atreus. It’s more famous excavator believed that he had
discovered a site of Homeric legend, famously proclaiming upon finding
a gold death mask: “Behold the face of Agamemnon!” This describes,
FTP, which archeological site located near Argos on the Peloponnese,
excavated by Schliemann in 1874? Jack {Abramoff} Along with his P.R.
partner, Michal Scanlon, this man was involved in a system known
internally as “Gimme Five.” Edwin A. Buckham was his pastor, who not
only prayed with him at work, but introduced him to Tom Delay. Ralph
Reed, former head of the Christian Coalition, was his link to anti-
gambling activists and officials at the White House. David Safavian
was indicted for allegedly hiding dealings with him while he worked to
gain control of government-managed land. These players were all
involved with, FTP, which lobbyist, who is currently under
investigation for a bribery scandal involving the Coushattas Native
American tribe and prominent members of Congress? {Tristan und
Isolde}; or {Tristan and Isolde} At the beginning of act II of this
opera, the female protagonist gets ready to extinguish the flames, but
is warned about Melot by Brangane. Debussy quoted it mockingly in
"Golliwog's Cakewalk" and used its namesake F natural, B natural, D
sharp, G sharp chord in other works. That chord, famous for its
harmonic ambiguity, reappears throughout while the female protagonist
goes from trying to poison the killer of her fiance in act I to
sinking into his body at the end of act III in a death by love, or
liebestod [LEE-besh-tote]. King Mark is the odd man out when the two
titular characters mistakenly take a love potion in, FTP this Richard
Wagner opera based on Arthurian legend. {Sargon of Akkad }or {Sargon
The Great }or {Sargon I} He rose to power by defeating the “King of
the Countries,” paving the way for his grandson to become “King of the
Four Quarters.” Evidence suggests that he moved his vast army with
boats, facilitating the conquest of Lagash, Ur, and Uruk. Attributing
his success to patronage of the goddess Ishtar, he erected the capital
city of Akkade in honor of her. Defeater of Lugal-Zaggisi and
predecessor to Naram-Sin, this is, FTP, which king, who, according to
legend, was found in a river-basket, became cup-bearer to the ruler of
Kish, and later established Mesopotamia’s first Semitic dynasty?
Rudolf {Carnap} He wrote in his essay "Psychology and Physical
Language" that "every sentence of psychology may be formulated in
physical language," thus elevating psychology above the quagmires of
metaphysics. From 1954 to his death in 1970 he was associated with
UCLA's department of philosophy, although he was born in Germany in
1891 and taught for many years at the University of Chicago, writing
Meaning and Necessity and Logical Foundations of Probability. His
distinction between direct and indirect verification served to
legitimize methods of scientific investigation and discredit normative
ethics. FTP, name this most famous member of the Vienna Circle who
wrote The Logical Syntax of Language. The {Man that Corrupted
Hadleyburg} One subject of this work has the ill luck to offend a
bitter and revengeful stranger, who, after a year of wandering and
scheming, devises a plan to steal the subject’s most prized
possession. Step one is to deliver a package to the wife of the bank
cashier while she is reading the “Missionary Herald.” Contained within
are gold coins weighing one hundred sixty pounds four ounces, a sealed
envelope, and a note thanking an anonymous man for a great kindness.
The remaining steps complete an intricate plot to destroy the
integrity of the most honest and upright town in all the region. FTP,
identify this short story by Mark Twain. {minister} (or {ambassador}
or {commissioner} or {plenipotentiary} ) to {France} The most famous
twentieth-century figure to hold this post was Sargent Shriver, and
Levi Morton missed a chance at becoming President when he accepted
this post rather than the nomination to be Garfield’s vice president.
Whitelaw Reid was serving in this position when he was nominated for
vice president on the losing 1892 Benjamin Harrison ticket, and John
Slidell held this position for the Confederacy. During the War of
1812, the position was held by William Crawford, later the Secretary
of War and Treasury, and Robert Livingston met Robert Fulton in this
capacity, later achieving much more fame for another act in this
position. Charles Cotesworth Pinckney was appointed to this post but
was refused, later becoming embroiled in a scandal involving the
country to which he was appointed. FTP, name this position held by
Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Jefferson, and the aforementioned
Livingston, who negotiated the Louisiana Purchase while serving this
post. {Avatars} of {Vishnu} (Prompt on Vishnu or Avatars; Accept
“Incarnations” or “Reincarnations” of Vishnu) One is a fish who warns
of a world-ending flood. Another is a tortoise who keeps a mountain
afloat in order to save the gods. A third is a boar who retrieves
stolen scriptures. A fourth is a semi-man, semi-lion who defeats a
demon to save the life of a devotee. Others include the dwarf-priest
Vamana, who claims the earth and the heavens by growing in size, and
Parasurama, who is a defender of the Brahmans. The tenth is Kalki, the
futuristic machine-man, who will come on a white horse with a blazing
sword to purge the world of evil and recreate a golden age. These are
all, FTP, members of which group of sacred figures, who along with
Rama, Krishna, and the Buddha manifest themselves during times of
evil, according to Hindu Mythology? The {Ambassadors} In this work,
Milrose native Mr. Waymarsh is a former lawyer and the sculptor
Gloriani appeared in one of the author’s earlier works. One of the
titular characters is at first accompanied on his travels by Maria
Gostrey, and in one scene in this novel, one of the title characters
implores Little Bilham to “…not miss things out of stupidity.” The
charms of Madame de Vionnet prove insufficient to keep one of the main
characters in Paris, where one of the title characters, Sarah Pocock,
is sent by Mrs. Newsome to replace the other title character. Focusing
on Lambert Strether’s half-hearted attempts to woo Chad Newsome back
to the United States, for 10 points name this Henry James novel.
{Coriolanus} One scene in this work compares the ruling powers to a
stomach that deliberately and fairly distributes nourishment to the
rest of the body, which represents society. In Act I, a group of
citizens are told, “You may as well strike at heaven with your staves
as lift them” against the state by Menenius. Although the play begins
with Cominius and Titus Lartius joining the title character in a
successful campaign, the central character dooms himself by allying
with the Volscian general Tullus Aufidius. Other characters include
the tribunes Brutus and Sicinius and Menenius, a nobleman who appeases
the plebeians. Featuring the titular Roman general Caius Martius, for
10 points name this drama of Shakespeare. {carboxylic acid}s ("acids"
not required after the end of the question) These compounds show
characteristic IR absorption at 2500 to 3000 inverse centimeters due
to their O-H bond and at 1710 to 1760 inverse centimeters. Typical
ways of producing them include the oxydative cleavage of alkenes and
the oxidation of alkylbenzenes, and one of the most widely used
compounds of this type is produced by the rhodium-catalyzed reaction
of methanol with carbon monoxide. Like ketones, they have sp2
hybridization, and like alcohols they exhibit strong hydrogen bonding,
with the result that most of them exist as cyclic dimers held together
by two hydrogen bonds. For ten points, identify these organic
compounds characterized by the presence of a carboxyl group, which
include such substances as acetic and ascorbic acids. “{For the Union
Dead”} Beginning with the epigraph Relinquunt Omnia Servare Rem
Publicam, images found in this poem include a cod-shaped weathervane
and “wasp-waisted” monuments. Noting that the poem’s central location
has no World War II monument, the poet points out a photograph on
Boylston Street showing Hiroshima burning over the “Rock of Ages”,
which is in fact a Mosler Safe. An abandoned aquarium that resembles
the Sahara is discussed in the first and last stanzas of this work,
and the fifteenth stanza describes the sight of weary black children
going to a newly desegregated school, while William James is desribed
as having been almost able to “hear the bronze Negroes breathe.”
Centering on the digging of a parking garage beneath St. Gaudens’ Shaw
Memorial on Boston Common, for 10 points identify this Robert Lowell
poem. The {Bald Soprano} Conversations in this work include a
discussion of Doctor Mackenzie-King removing Mr. Parker’s liver, and
an attempt to figure out which Bobby Watson has died. Allegedly
bizarre incidents described by the central characters include a man
who bent to tie his shoelace and a man on a subway reading a
newspaper, and the Fire Chief plays a prank by ringing doorbells and
hiding before asking if anyone has heard of the title figure.
Centering on a conversation between the Smiths and the Martins that
descends into gibberish, for 10 points identify this absurdist drama
by Eugene Ionesco. Saint {Bonaventure} His theology is summarized in
the appropriately named Breviloquium and his masters were John of La
Rochelle and Alexander of Hales. He was elevated to the rank of
minister general for his defense of the mendicants against the attacks
of William of Saint-Amour, and at the second Council of Lyons he
reconciled the parish clergy and the mendicant orders. Known for
healing the rift within the Franciscan order between the Spirituals
and Relaxati, for 10 points name this saint, the Seraphic Doctor who
wrote Journey of the Mind to God. {C}aenorhabditis {elegans} One of
the first successes of its use resulted from the study of the unc-54
gene encoding for a myosin heavy chain. Its Bergerac strain was found
to exhibit frequent spontaneous mutation due to the transposition of
the Tc1 transposon, and of the 671 cells generated by its emryonic
lineage, 113 undergo programmed cell death, so that its larva
possesses 558 cells. Capable of reproducing hermaphroditically as well
as of crossing hermaphrodites with males, its 302-cell nervous system
was mapped completely in 1986 by White, Southgate, Thomson, and
Brenner. For ten points, identify this model organism whose genome of
about 100 million base pairs was completely mapped by 2002, a nematode
about 1 millimeter in length. On the {Genealogy of Morals} The second
essay of this work points out the similarity between the German words
for “guilt” and “debt” and discusses the joy of the punishment
festivals of old. This work claims that modern philosophy convinces
the suffering to believe that their troubles are their own fault,
leading people to indulge in “orgies of feeling” and that bad
conscience is a product of the transition from hunter-gatherer society
to permanent settlement. Its third essay claims that philosophers have
adopted the role of “ascetic priests” and decries the slave mentality
of the New Testament. A continuation of the author’s prior Human, All
too Human, for 10 points name this Friedrich Nietzsche work that
explores the origins of the modern views of good and evil. {Lugh}
Lamhfada or {Lonnbemmnech} or {Samildanach} Although he is not
Perseus, his one-eyed grandfather heard a prophecy that this man would
kill him and consequently locked this man’s mother Ethniu in a tower.
Raised by Cian’s brother, the smith god Goibhniu, he fathered his most
famous son on Deichtine. He defeated the Fomorii at the second battle
of Magh Tuireadh, at which he also killed his grandfather Balor, and
succeeded Nuada as king. His festival was replaced by the Christian
Lammas, or the feast of first fruits, and during the Cattle Raid of
Cooley he healed the wounds of Cuchulain. With a name meaning “long
hand”, for 10 points name this Irish deity, the sun god and leader of
the Tuatha De Danann. {Cavalleria rusticana} or {Rustic Chivalry} The
refusal of a glass of wine prompts the biting of another man’s ear by
the main character in this work. The “Regina Coeli” can be heard
emanating from within a church during this opera, and its other songs
include the drinking song “Viva il vino spumeggiante”. “Il cavallo
scalpita” celebrates work as a teamster, and the subject of the song
“O Lola” is the central figure’s onetime lover. Set on Easter Sunday,
Mamma Lucia rushes into church to pray after hearing the “Fior di
giaggiolo” from Santuzza, and the “Addio alla madre” signals Turiddu’s
farewell as he goes to defend his honor against Alfio. Based on a
short story by Giovanni Verga, for 10 points name this Pietro Mascagni
opera. {gravitational lensing} This phenomenon can be derived by
combining a characteristic logarithmic time dilation with Fermat's
principle of least time. One parameter which determines the strength
of this effect is proportional to the Schwarzchild radius, and an
infinite mass density, such as a black hole, participating in this
process, will produce an infinitely sharp spike at the arrival time
surface. The most effective form of this effect is produced by
galactic clusters, and this effect also exists in a "micro" form,
which is produced by bodies with masses on the order of a solar mass.
Characterized in sufficiently strong regimes by Einstein rings, for
ten points, identify this process in which a massive body bends the
optical trajectory of light. {Peasant Wedding} (accept equivalents
such as Peasant Marriage) Karel van Mander claimed that the bearded
man on the right of this painting is the artist himself, and the wall
of straw denotes that this painting is set during the harvest season.
The stack of mugs is located on the bottom left side foreshadows the
merry making to come, and a girl with a peacock feather in her hat is
seen licking a bowl on the left foreground. The bagpiper in this
painting stands out from the crowd as being thin and hungry, a
contrast to the gluttonous man in the middle who is stuffing his face
with rice pudding. Set in a barn and centering on the bride who sits
beneath a paper crown, for 10 points name this painting of the
festivities surrounding a marriage, a work of Pieter Bruegel.
{Mississippi State} Their baseball team plays at Polk-Demint Stadium,
which seats over 14,000 people, and their baseball alums include Buck
Showalter and Will Clark. Their 1996 men’s basketball team defeated
Princeton, Connecticut, and Cincinnati to reach the Final Four, and in
1992 their former football coach famously castrated a bull on the eve
of this school’s victory over Texas. With their football program
currently coached by Sylvester Croom and formerly coached by Jackie
Sherrill, for 10 points identify this Starkville based SEC school.
{Nuremburg} In 1332 this city was granted the right to trade tax free
with 72 localities and from 1356 onward the Holy Roman Empire would
hold its first diet there. It was the sight of a 1532 peace treaty
that permitted the alliance of Charles V and the Protestant League,
and during the Thirty Years War, Gustavus II was besieged in this city
by Albrecht von Wallenstein. Philip Melanchthon founded a Gymnasium
there in 1526 and in 1424 the imperial crown jewels were sent there,
where they would remain in this city’s Hospital Church of the Holy
Ghost for the next 350 years. The center of the German Renaissance,
for 10 points name this city which held Nazi war crime trials after
World War II. Dean {Rusk} Appointed in 1947 to head the Office of
Special Political Affairs, he privately opposed the establishment of
Israel. Onetime head of the Rockefeller Foundation, he denounced an
official United States apology to North Korea as “a lie” before he
signed his name to it in order to gain the release of Lloyd Boucher
and his crew during the Pueblo Incident. Often overshadowed by
McGeorge Bundy, during the Cuban Missile Crisis he is credited with
saying, “We're eyeball to eyeball and the other fellow just blinked.”
A staunch defender of the Vietnam War, for 10 points name this man who
served as secretary of state during the Kennedy and Johnson
administrations. {Edward the Black Prince} His biographer was Sir John
Chandos and he once gave the ferry of Saltash to William Lenche in
recognition of Lenche’s loss of an eye in battle. He endowed a
religious house at Ashbridge in 1376 and legend has it that King Pedro
the Cruel of Castile gave him a ruby after the Battle of Najera that
can be found in the imperial state crown. Richard Grafton gave him his
nickname and he directed the massacre and burning of Limoges in 1370
and supported the Good Parliament of 1376, though he is most famous
for two decisive victories ten years apart which demonstrated the
superiority of English archers over the mounted charge. The eldest son
of Edward III, for 10 points name this man who defeated Philip IV and
John II at the battles of Crecy and Poitiers respectively. Heisenberg
{Uncertainty} Principle One way of obtaining this relation is to
consider the energy limitations on the adiabatic approximation in
time-dependent perturbation theory. It can be deduced as a consequence
of the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality, and the lifetime of virtual
particles of a given energy is limited by this relation. Operators
subject to it include the x, y, and z components of the angular
momentum, and the quantities which enter into this relation are
typically given as the square root of the quantity average of the
square minus the average squared. Typically applied to conjugate
observables such as position and momentum, for ten points, identify
this quantum-mechanical principle which places a limit on the
simultaneous accuracy with which two quantities can be measured.
{Mobutu} Sese Seko He served in the finance department of the Force
Publique, became a reporter for L’Avenir, and later became editor of
Actualites Africaines. As part of his National Authenticity campaign,
he required people to drop their Christian names, and he nationalized
the Katanga copper mines. He came to power by manipulating a struggle
between Joseph Kasavubu and Moise Tshombe and was one of the world’s
wealthiest potentates before being deposed by Laurent Kabila. Brought
to power when his troops arrested Patrice Lumumba, for 10 points
identify this longtime dictator of Zaire. {Black} Sea The Pontic
Mountains run along its southern coast and the Kolkhida lowlands bound
it on the east. Its lower levels are biologically dead because of a
lack of ventilation on its floor, and its islands include Berezan,
which is located at the mouth of the Dniester, and Zymiyiny, which is
located near the Danube delta. For 10 points identify this sea that is
connected to the Sea of Azov by the Kerch Strait and the Sea of
Marmara by the Bosporus. The {Naked Gun} In this film, it is revealed
that Kelner was in fact innocent two years after he went to the
electric chair and that the chief villain likes East German men. A
Doctor at the intensive care ward at Our Lady of the Worthless Miracle
makes an attempt on a patient’s and the main character’s ex-wife used
to stay on the road with the Chicago Male Chorus three hundred days a
year despite not knowing what a harp was. Captain Ed Hocken cries
uncontrollably after a band marches over Ludwig’s corpse, claiming
that his father died the same way, and Jane and the main character are
seen laughing uncontrollably after watching Platoon. Centering on a
plot to kill Queen Elizabeth II and the attempted murder of Nordberg,
for 10 points name this comedy in which Leslie Nielsen stars as
Lieutenant Frank Drebin. Isaac {Albeniz} His compositions were
transcribed for the guitar by Francisco Tarrega. During a long musical
tour in London, he composed a series of dances called Suites Anciennes
before agreeing to write the music for an opera by Francis Money-
Coutts. After journeying to Hungary to attempt to study with Liszt, he
decided to hooked up with his teacher Felipe Pedrell and composed the
prelude to Chants d’Espagne, a work known as “Leyenda.” Also the
creator of a musical suite which includes the pieces “Jerez”,
“Almeria”, and “El Corpus en Sevilla,” FTP name this composer of music
for Pepita Jimenez, Suite Espanola,and Iberia, a virtuoso Spanish
pianist. Max {Demian} He has a dream where he climbs up a ladder and
sees a vast plain of burning houses, which he sees as a premonition of
World War I. The son of Frau Eva, he first appears wearing a mourning
band in school, where he befriends the narrator after saving him from
the tortures of Franz Kromer. He also continually reinterprets
Scripture, saying that the good thief during the Crucifixion was a
“sniveling convert” who betrayed the devil, and he believes that Cain
was a powerful and courageous man whose mark was really a mark of
distinction. The most influential person in Emil Sinclair’s life, FTP,
identify this title character of a Hermann Hesse bildungsroman. {Ming}
Its 6th emperor was captured and returned by the Oirot while
inspecting the frontier. Zhang Juzheng, a Neige Daxueshi imperial
tudor, cracked down on corruption and stored silver from Japan,
governing in place of the young Wanli emperor, who later tried to make
his third son his heir. Tian Tan, or Altar of Heaven, was built, the
Great Wall was improved, Jingdezhen porcelain became famous, and Macao
was leased to Portugal. It ended when rebel Li Zicheng entered
Beijing, only to be crushed by the Manchu Nurhaci. FTP name this
dynasty founded by Zhu Yuanzhang after the overthrow of the Yuan.
Hermann {Ebbinghaus} For one of his experiments, this man devised 2300
one-syllable consonant- vowel-consonant combinations, such as taz,
bok, and lef. Willhelm Wundt criticized this man by claiming that
these nonsense syllables had limited applicability to actual
information, and while at the University of Breslau, this man
developed the first widely-used intelligence test. He is best known
for a work with such sections as “Retention as a function of the
number of repetitions,” and “Retention as a function of repeated
learning,” and among the ideas he devised was a “forgetting curve”
similar to that developed by Gustav Fechner. FTP, identify this German
experimental psychologist, best remembered today for a mathematical
treatment of learning in his classic On Memory. {Wahhabism} Their 1806
campaign destroyed the holy resting place of the most sacred incisor
in all the Middle East. This movement’s founder wrote Kitab al Tawhid
in Basra and his descendants became known as the Al ash-Shaykh, and
the protestations against bidah or innovations of the originally
Hanbali scholar Ibn Taimiyya can be seen as a precursor to this modern
movement. The dynasty with which this movement is most closely
associated was ousted by the Egyptian wali Mohammed Ali for the first
time, but this movement was empowered once more when a nutty Hashemite
decided to call himself caliph. Salafis are offended when you
associate it with the Salafi school. It promotes the hadith and Qur’an
as the only sources for religion, and is against the worship of
saints, including the worship of the prophet Muhammad, which caused
them to destroy holy sites in Mecca and Medina. Associated with the Al
Saud régime, this is FTP, what extremist Islamic sect? {Elmer Gantry}
He was saved by Judson Roberts, and was nicknamed “Hell-Cat.” The
college roommate of Jim Lefferts, he later entered Mizpah Theological
Seminary. His indiscretions with wine and women got him kicked out,
however, and he became the crack salesman of the Pequod Farm Implement
Company before re-entering the world of religion. He joins the
Methodists after an encounter with Bishop Wesley Toomis, and preaches
at Banjo Crossing, Rudd Center, Vulcan, and Sparta. This occurred
after the death of his partner sister Sharon Falconer, and before he
became the pastor of a large church in Zenith. FTP identify this
religious hypocrite, the titular subject of a Sinclair Lewis novel.
{Norway} or {Norge} Peter I and Bouvet Island are among its Antarctic
possessions, and its most famous overseas possession is made up of
islands including Edge and Nordaustlandet and contains a Russian
settlement of 900 people. That possesion’s largest city is
Longyearbyen [LONG-YARE-BYEN], and islands of this country’s coast
include Lofoten and Vesterålen. It also posses the island of Jan Mayen
and it is home to Europe’s deepest lake, Hornindalsvatnet, and its
easternmost cities are Vardo and Kirkenes, close to the town of
Nikel’. Its fylkes or provinces include Rogaland, Hordaland, Finnmark,
and Trondelag [TRUN-DUH-LAHG], and the latter is home to one of this
nation’s most prominent cities. Tromso is the world’s northernmost
university town, and other cities include Stavanger, Kristiansand, and
Trondheim. Featuring geographical features such as the Sognefjord,
FTP, name this Scandinavian country with capital at Oslo. {Phoenix}
{Suns} (accept either) On November 10, 1990, this team posted 107
points in the first half against the Denver Nuggets on their way to a
173-point showing. Thanks to the effort of players such as Paul Silas,
Gail Goodrich, and Dick Van Arsdale, it made the playoffs in just its
second season, losing in the Western Semis to the Lakers. Its worst
moments as a franchise came in the mid-80’s when rampant drug use
among players such as Johnny High got a large portion of the team
suspended, and among its notable early stars are Alvan Adams, Walter
Davis, and Connie Hawkins, who made his NBA debut with this team. This
year, the team has acquired Tim Thomas from Chicago and the surprise
play of players such as Boris Diaw has helped the team overcome the
loss of superstar Amare Stoudemire. FTP, name this NBA team led by
Shawn Marion and Steve Nash. Roscoe {Conkling} When asked if he would
support James Blaine for the presidency, this man snapped, “No, thank
you. I don’t engage in criminal practice.” That response may have been
due to Blaine satirizing his pomposity by calling attention to his
“turkey-gobbler strut”. After supporting James Garfield in 1880, he
was angered when Garfield appointed a reformer to be Collector of the
Port of New York, believing that his control of the New York patronage
system was being undermined. To rebuke Garfield, he resigned his
Senate seat in protest, along with Thomas Platt. Serving as a
Republican for fourteen years beginning in 1867, FTP, identify this
leader of the Stalwarts. {Tsukuyomi} no Mikoto; or {Tsuki no kami}; or
{Takamagahara} He angered his sister when he killed Uke Mochi, the
goddess of food, after the former sent him to represent her at a feast
in which Uke Mochi created the food in such a way that disgusted him
to the point of killing her. His sister’s anger at this action
resulted in their always occupying different parts of the sky. His
name is a combination of the Japanese words for reading and the
celestial figure he represents. The second of Izanagi’s three noble
children born when he cleansed himself of his sins, name, FTP, this
male moon god of Japanese mythology, brother of Amateratsu. Harold
{Pinter} In one of his works, the quiet marriage of Deeley and Kate is
shattered by the appearance of Kate’s college roommate Anna, while
another chronicles a seven-year affair between Emma and Jerry in
reverse. Besides Old Times and Betrayal, he also wrote a play about
Rose Hudd, who is told “come home, Sal” by a blind Negro named Riley.
That work, The Room, was a precursor to his play about Goldberg and
McCann’s abduction of the pianist Stanley Webber from a dilapidated
boarding house. Known for his frequent use of pauses, FTP, name this
British dramatist of The Birthday Party. {Sieve} of {Eratosthenes}
Wheel factorization is often used first on the list to increase the
speed before this algorithm is used. The highest factor one needs to
check using it is the square root of the given number, rounded down.
Starting with two lists, the first starts empty while the second
consists of prime numbers that you have found. Every time you find a
prime less than the square root of the given number, you proceed
through the list and cross off all of its multiples. FTP, identify
this method of determining all of the prime numbers up to a given
number developed by an ancient Greek mathematician. The {Tribute
Money} or {Tributo Della Moneta} A large, white building appears on
right of this painting, in front of which a man in a red tunic is seen
with a cane. The central part of this work depicts people arranged in
a semi-circular pattern, with the orthogonal lines leading to the
vanishing point just above of Jesus’ head, creating a linear
perspective. The emphasis on realism can be seen in the ripples
propagating towards the bank of the lake on the left, where a man can
be seen bending down to pry the titular object out of the mouth of a
fish. Depicting in synoptic sequence a scene from Matthew 17:24 to 27,
FTP identify this fresco, painted for the Brancacci chapel by
Masaccio. Jose {Saramago} One of this man’s novels depicts the life of
Cipriano Algor, who is made obsolete by a sinister mega-mall called
“The Center.” Another of his novels focuses on the a bureaucrate who
becomes obsessed with an unknown woman, and is entitled All the Names.
He detailed the adventures of the heteronym of Fernando Pessoa, who
has invented the title character in The Year of the Death of Ricardo
Reis, and caused controversy with his ironic look at the life of Jesus
in the novel The Gospel According to Jesus Christ. He is best known,
however, for a novel written without quotation marks or proper names
that begins with a man sitting in traffic who realizes he cannot see,
as well as for a novel in which the Iberian peninsula detaches itself
from the European mainland. FTP, name this Portuguese author of
Blindness and The Stone Raft. {Ötzi} the {Iceman} (either acceptable;
also accept {Oetzi}, {Frozen Fritz}, and the {Similaun Mummy}) Just
like King Tut, this mummy is alleged to have a curse because 9 of the
people related to his excavation have died in the past 15 years. A
research team from the University of Camerino has recently suggested
that he might be infertile due to environmental factors. He had 57
tattoos which some scientists believe represent an early form of
acupuncture. On his gear there were traces of blood of four other
people, leading to the theory that he got into a fight in which he was
injured, fled, and eventually died due to blood loss; however, it is
now thought he was shot by an arrow. FTP, name this Chalcolithic mummy
discovered in 1991 in a section of the Central European Alps and
dating from 3300BC. {Prague Spring} or {Pražské jaro} It was
motivated, in part, by the publication in the Literary Gazette of the
“Two Thousand Words,” which had been written by a formerly exiled
president of the country where it occurred. A conference at Cierna-
nad-Tisou failed to resolve the tensions surrounding this event, and
it began in earnest with the adoption of the Action Program. It was
followed by a period known as “normalization” under the auspices of
Gustav Husak, who had replaced its initiatior when Soviet troops
entered its namesake city, and it also featured the protest death of
Jan Palach. Ending on April 17, 1969, FTP, identify this event
precipitated by Alexander Dubcek’s introduction of “Socialism with a
Human Face”? {Maxwell’s Demon} The Ranque-Hilsch vortex tube operates
in a manner similar to this concept, and Charles Bennett reformulated
this concept in a 1982 paper which also analyzed ballistic computers.
This concept was also analyzed by Rolf Landauer in a paper entitled
Irreversibility and Heat Generation in the Computing Process, and
another variant of this concept is known as the Smoluchowski Valve.
More famously, a refutation to it was conceived by Leo Szilard, who
considered the cost of converting one bit of knowledge into work, and
Leon Brillouin, who noted that it could not violate the second law of
thermodynamics because storing information would increase entropy.
FTP, identify this thought experiment named for a British physicist,
in which a small creature separates fast-moving from slow-moving
particles. {Diamond} Sutra (or {Vajracchedika-prajñāpāramitā-sūtra}) A
copy of it printed in 868 CE was found in a cave in China early in the
20th century, making it the oldest known dated printed book. It is
often memorized and chanted in Buddhist monasteries because it only
takes about 40 minutes to read. It has retained high popularity in the
Mahāyāna school for over a millennium, most importantly with the Zen
school of meditation, as it resonates with a central theme of “non-
abiding.” Better known in English with a name accurate for its
durability is, FTP, this sutra whose name translates as “The
Perfection of Wisdom Sutra that Cuts like a Thunderbolt.” the {Green
Zone} [accept {International Zone}; prompt on The {Bubble}] The center
of this recently created neighborhood can be entered via the 14th of
July Bridge, which joins the Karkh and Karadah districts. It was
created around older buildings such as the Republican Palace, Adnan
Building, Believers Palace, and Al-Rasheed Hotel. Patrolled by Bradley
vehicles and Abrams tanks from Camp Steel Dragon, it was constructed
around the area known as “Uday's Playground” as well as the major
palaces used by Saddam Hussein. British representatives are required
to use an armored car and four bodyguards to leave this area,
delineated by razor wire, checkpoints, and the concrete T-Walls. FTP,
name this super-secured section of central Baghdad in which American
administrators and media live. {Unfinished} Symphony or Symphony No.
{8} in B Minor Roughly a minute into its first movement, which is in
3/4 time, a loud cadence from the bassoons and horns leads into the
transition to G major, after which the cellos and then the violins
state the main theme, soon being interrupted by a forceful string
outburst often called a “purple patch.” The second movement, in 3/8
time, explores the keys of G major, C major, and A minor, but is
primarily set in the key of E major, with the tempo Andante con Moto.
The Entr’acte from Rosamunde, also with a main key of B minor, is
believed to be the outgrowth of the composer’s planned finale of this
work, for which only nine bars of its scherzo were mapped out before
the composer would go on to pursue writing the Great C Major Symphony
instead. FTP, identify this Franz Schubert symphony that only has two
completed movements. {Zanzibar} or {Zinjibar} Jamshid ibn Abd ‘Allah
was the only man of a line established here in 1806 to rule this land
independently in the twentieth century, doing so for a month before he
was ousted and a People’s Republic was established. Of a far greater
brevity was the war over the succession of Sultan Hamad bin Thuwaini,
which saw Khalid ibn Barghash attempt a coup in a war that lasted
three quarters of an hour. In 1886, the Germans and British determined
that this state held territories from Mimbini to Cape Delgado, or from
Kenya to Mozambique, and in an 1890 treaty, Germany gained Helgoland
and agreed not to interfere with British interests in this sultanate,
which had been ruled for a century by former Omani rulers. FTP, name
this island that united with Tanganyika in 1964 and put the “zan” into
“Tanzania,” an exotic destination for a Bing Crosby and Bob Hope
“Road” movie. {Juno and the Paycock} Early on, one of the title
characters repeatedly complains about trouble putting on and removing
his moleskin pants as a ruse to put off seeing Father Farrell about a
job. The arrival of a self-proclaimed Theosophist results in a spree
of money borrowing and lavish purchases of furniture and a gramophone,
the latter of which is snatched by Mrs. Madigan. Of the two central
children, one rejects Jerry Devine’s offer to marry her in spite of
her impregnation by Michael Bentham; the other, who had lost his arm
in battle, rats out Robert Tancred and is killed for it by Republican
militiamen. Amidst the tragedies that befall Mary and Johnny, the
female title character prepares to leave her husband, who is busy
getting drunk with Joxer Daly. FTP, identify this Sean O’Casey play
about Mrs. Boyle and her ostentatiously titled husband. {determinant}
This quantity can be defined directly through transformations of the
totally antisymmetric permutation tensor, and the problem of finding
the largest one for some set of values was posed by Hadamard. The
Cayley-Menger form gives the volume of a simplex in n dimensions,
while the “hyper” form of this quantity is defined for tensors of rank
higher than two. Solving the eigenvalue problem requires setting this
quantity to zero, and a system of linear equations will have a unique
solution if this quantity of the associated with the system’s matrix
is nonzero, according to Cramer’s Rule. Typically computed by
expansion in cofactors, for ten points, identify this function defined
for square matrices, which for a two by two matrix with entries a, b,
c, d, is given by ad minus cb. {Ma’at} Hatshepsut built a small shrine
dedicated to this mythological figure, which can be found in the
temple of Karnak, and the hieroglyphs of this figure’s name represents
the primeval mound. Amenhotep II claimed that this figure was placed
on his breast by Amun himself, and her origins can be traced back to
the Old Kingdom, where she is described as being at the nostrils of
Ra. She came into existence at the moment of creation, and was
depicted with wings and an ostrich feather on her head. FTP, name this
wife of Thoth, the Egyptian goddess of harmony, truth, and justice.
Otto {Rank} [or Otto {Rosenfeld}] He’s not Dostoyevsky, but, after
watching the H.H. Ewer film The Student of Prague, he wrote a
reflection on the doppelganger theme entitled The Double. He praised
resistant patients for using the will as a motivating factor, and
broke into psychoanalysis when he read The Interpretation of Dreams
during his time off from a job in a machine shop. He followed his
first publication, The Artist, by applying the idea of the Oedipus
complex to literature in general in The Incest Motif in Poetry and
Saga and anticipating Joseph Campbell in the more general The Myth of
the Birth of the Hero. Although a protégé of Freud, he was expelled
from the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society for writing a book which
identified a single source of neurosis undergone by all people. FTP,
name this author of The Trauma of Birth. {Chandragupta} Maurya [accept
{Sandrakottos} until mentioned, prompt thereafter] Supposedly he died
engaging in the Jainist practice of sallekhana, starving himself and
dying at Bhadrabahu Cave. He met his most notable advisor in Taxila,
in modern-day Pakistan, who may have had a rivalry with a dynasty
whose last king was Dhana. An envoy of Seleucus Nicator provides one
of the best historiographies of this ruler and his administration, the
Indica of Megasthenes. Upon his death, his son Bindusara succeeded him
and his advisor, who produced the text Arthashastra, was retained.
That advisor was known alternately as Chanakya or Kautilya, and this
man had come to power by defeating the Nanda dynasty of Magadha, and
was known as Sandrakottos by the Greeks. FTP, name this Indian ruler,
the namesake of two rulers of a later dynasty and founder of the
Mauryan Empire. Augustus {Saint-Gaudens} A statue of a portly man
holding a cloak and a hat comprises his memorial to copper baron
Marcus Daly, located at the University of Montana. The image of a long
quotation and golden harp are inscribed in brick over his most major
European design, a memorial to Charles Parnell at O’Connell Street in
Dublin. His main foray into classical themes was a large sculpture of
a nude Diana shooting a bow, which he intended to be placed on a tower
at Madison Square Garden. The creator of a “colony” of artists based
out of his summer home at Cornish, New Hampshire, he submitted designs
for the eagle and double eagle coins and sculpted monuments to William
Sherman and David Farragut in New York City. Also the creator of a
bronze monument to the black 54th regiment, this is, FTP, what
American sculptor, who decorated Boston Common with his Shaw Memorial?
{One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich} Upon hearing a derisive
reference to “Old Man Whiskers,” the title character reflects on being
able to say things he wouldn’t have gotten away with in Ust-Izhma. The
arrival of the protagonist’s rival engineer faction ends up saving him
from being caught with a piece of metal stuffed into his mitten, after
which he hurries to the parcel room to await the expected delivery of
food. The snitch Panteleyev and Eino and his unnamed partner are minor
members of the protagonist’s Gang 104, which also contains the teenage
Gopchik, Tsezar, the recipient of the aforementioned package, and the
leader Tyurin, a veteran who oversees the duties of his fellow
prisoners. FTP, identify this Alexander Solzhenitsyn novel that
chronicles a brief moment in the title character’s ten year prison
sentence. Jonathan Clay “J.J.” {Redick} He wrote, “I was the
inspiration to Martin Luther King/I’m the reason Ray Charles could
sing” in a poem that describes his “strength of a condor” and
“commitment of an American soldier.” His religious works discuss the
“four corners of the earth, all touched by God’s churches” and lament
that “the devil insists on trying to battle me.” He is currently ahead
of Gary Buchanan and has already passed Dickie Hemric in his quest for
two non-literary records. This graduate of Cave Springs High School in
Roanoke, Virginia was formerly Daniel Ewing’s co-captain and now holds
the overall free-throw mark as well as the ACC’s lead for total points
scored. FTP, name this shooting guard who recently finished his
college career in a tie with many other players for last place in
number of NCAA titles, the leading scorer for Duke. {vortex} or
{vortices} When the Meissner effect occurs in type II superconductors,
these objects separate the threaded flux tubes in the material. Their
shedding can occur when air flows past a rigid structure, and if the
shedding frequency is equal to the structure’s resonant frequency, the
structure can collapse. One of these exists under every sunspot, and
the Von Karman sheet is a repeating pattern of these objects. A polar
one is a powerful cyclone that exists at the north and south poles,
and more famous examples of them are hurricanes and tornados. For ten
points, identify these rotating structures which can form during
turbulent flow or in such situations as water going down a drain.
{Jeanne d'Arc}; or {Joan of Arc} Accepting the help of Constable de
Richemont despite the oppposition of George de La Tremoille, this
military leader took Troyes after a visit by the town's Brother
Richard, and was forced to abandon Paris after taking Reims, where
Renaud de Chartres was archbishop. Taken at Compiegne along with
brother Pierre and squire Jean d'Aulon by John of Luxembourg, she was
taken to Bouvreuil castle occupied by the Earl of Warwick before
Pierre Cauchon, bishop of Beauvais, and Jean Lemaitre, inquisitor of
France, tried her. FTP name this advocate of the Dauphin, crowning him
at Reims as Charles VI, who made history with La Hire at Orleans, a
maid later burned at Rouen. {Luncheon of the Boating Party} or
{Dejeuner}{ des Canotiers} Amidst the dark green foliage in the upper
right corner of this work, a woman playfully covers her ears with her
black gloves as two bearded men, one wearing a straw hat with a red
stripe, engage her. The Chatou railroad bridge appears in the distant
background, and the woman in the center, who wears a flower on her hat
and sips from a wine glass, is the actress Ellen Andree. The young
girl leaning on the balcony and staring off in the direction of the
viewer is named Alphonsine, and is believed to be the sister of the
bearded man in a white sleeveless shirt, who fills most of this
painting’s left half. The woman seated in the foreground, playing with
a puppy, is the artist’s future wife, and she sits across the wine-
filled table from the fellow painter Gustave Caillebotte. Showing a
group of friends from the Maison Fournaise on a tour of the Seine,
this is, FTP, what Pierre-Auguste Renoir painting depicting an
afternoon meal on a water vessel? Derek {Walcott} He lamented his
native region’s lack of an established history in the essay “Culture
of Mimicry” and discussed his own poetic influences in the
autobiographical Another Life. The use of sections entitled “North”
and “South” in The Fortunate Traveler and titles such as The Castaway
emphasize his theme of alienation and feeling torn between his native
culture and the colonial English one, which also is reinforced in The
Arkansas Testament. The Capeman, Ti-Jean and his Brothers, and A
Branch of the Blue Nile are three of the nearly thirty plays by this
author, who immortalized the painter Camille Pissarro in Tiepolo’s
Hound and told of the fishermen Hector and Achille in his masterwork,
an ambitious epic based on The Iliad and The Odyssey. FTP, identify
this man from St. Lucia, the author of Omeros. Republic of {Benin} [or
Republique du {Benin}] This country contains Africa’s largest lake
village, which was established by the Tofinu people near Lake Nokoué
and is called Ganvie. The northwestern portion of this country, which
is home to the market town of Djougou, is characterized by unusually
dry conditions due to the Atakora Barrier. Its eastern portion
contains the Atacora Mountains and Mount Sokbaro, while the city of
Malanville is in the northern portion and lies on the Niger River. The
city of Allada is considered its center of animism, while its official
seat of government is Cotonou, which is located on the country’s
namesake bight. FTP, name this West African nation, sandwiched between
Togo and Nigeria, with capital at Porto Novo. On the {City of God}
Against the Pagans [or De {civitate Dei} contra paganos] One section
of this work compares Romulus and Plato, while another details how
“Platonists are to be held as excelling other philosophers in logic.”
Its penultimate section details eternal punishment of the damned,
suggesting that “bodies may remain unconsumed and alive in fire,” and
its last book contains a discussion on “the resurrection of the
flesh.” Ultimately, it credits internal moral decay, not the adoption
of Christianity, as the reason Rome was sacked. FTP, name this 22-book
work describing a location where people forego earthly pleasure and
dedicate their lives to the promotion of Christian values, written by
Saint Augustine of Hippo. Jacques {Derrida} In four essays, Herman
Rapaport wrote about the recent works of this man, which discuss his
interpretation of Tonnies’s concepts of Gemeinschaft and Gesellschaft.
This philosopher delineated the nature of “voyous” in Rogues: Two
Essays on Reason. He discussed Patocka's Heretical Essays on the
History of Philosophy and critiqued Kierkegaard's Fear and Trembling
in the work The Gift of Death. He studied under Louis Althusser, and
in 1954, examined the internal tension in Husserl's central notion of
“genesis.” Later works include Speech and Phenomena and Writing and
Difference, and his most famous work discusses an anti-Kantian
approach to language. FTP, name this author of Of Grammatology, the
developer of deconstruction. {Brown} v. Board of Education of Topeka
{II} [or {Brown} v. Board of Education of Topeka {1955}; or {Brown} v.
Board of Education of Topeka _349 It called for a plan “guided by
equitable principles” and “characterized by a practical flexibility,”
and noted that “the burden rests on the defendants to establish that
additional time is necessary in the public interest.” It re-affirmed
the Supreme Court’s original ruling in the matter and warned that “the
vitality of these constitutional principles cannot be allowed to yield
simply because of disagreement with them.” Clarifying the previous
decision by addressing the issue of relief, it ordered that “all
deliberate speed” be employed. FTP, name this decision issued one year
after a like-named case that overturned Plessy v. Ferguson by
outlawing segregation in public schools. {Peasant Wedding} Feast In
the lower foreground, a boy wears a large red hat that covers his face
as he licks his finger and holds a leftover bowl; behind him a man
pours beer into one of a pile of empty jugs. A pair of bagpipers also
appear on the left, while the man on the far right in Spanish attire
is most likely the landowner, observing the title event. At the end of
the central table, two servants present a large wooden tray containing
bowls of porridge. FTP, name this Pieter Breugel the Elder painting
showing serfs celebrating a marriage. {verismo} (prompt on “realism”
until it is mentioned) Foreign works that fit this style include Eugen
d’Albert’s Tiefland and Jules Massenet’s La Navarraise. This term was
first applied to the novel Giacinta and peaked in popularity during
its nation’s fin-de-siecle period. Mala Vita and the first work of the
Tritico, Il Tabaro were other characteristically dark operatic
examples, though they paled in stature compared to Cavalleria
Rusticana. FTP, name this Italian form of realism that sought to
depict the sordid everyday events of lower class life. The {Card
Players} In paintings of this name, Theodor Rombouts depicted the
titular men as dandies in large feathered hats. De Stijl leader Theo
van Doesburg did two geometrically-themed versions, with his latter
1917 edition being an indistinguishable blur of black and white
rectangles. Fernand Leger’s Cubist version shows several men made out
of blue ovals gathered around a yellow table. The best-known series of
this name depicts ragged-looking French guys sitting across each other
at a small table and focusing on their hands. FTP, give the title of
these gaming-inspired paintings, the last of which was done by Paul
Cezanne. {waltz} It is considered to have evolved from either the
weller or the laendler, and is performed primarily in closed position.
Beethoven wrote a series of variations on one by Diabelli, and
Sibelius’ music for Kuolema includes a “romantic” one and a “sad” one.
Brahms wrote his Op. 39, No. 15 one in A flat major and Tchaikovsky
wrote one “of the Flowers,” for his Nutcracker Suite. FTP, name this
type of dance in 3/4 time, of which Johann Strauss Jr. was “king.”
{Hanging Gardens} of Babylon The only agreement that Strabo and
Diodorus had about this structure was that it was rectangular, and
that each side was four plethra long. It probably functioned by
employing two-wheeled chain pumps, which filled channels at the top
through buckets attached to the chains. This system would compensate
for the dry climate by bringing in a steady supply of water from the
Euphrates. FTP, name this ancient wonder of the world associated with
Nebuchadnezzar. {Washington Post} March This work was the hastily
written product of Frank Hatton’s request for a short piece to be
played at a June 1889 ceremony. A seven measure chromatic passage
introduces this band piece in 6/8 time, which gained additional
popularity when it was adapted for the two-step. First performed by
the US Marine Band as part of festivities honoring winners of an essay
contest and set outside the Smithsonian, this is, FTP, which this John
Phillip Sousa march named for a D.C. newspaper? {pointillism} (accept
“{divisionism}”) Sailboats and Estuary is one notable non-French
painting to exhibit this style, and its painter, Theo Van
Rysselberghe, was the foremost Belgian master of it. Charles Angrand,
Hippolyte Petitjean, and Maximilien Luce were other proponents. Henri-
Edmond Cross and Paul Signac were other leading practitioners of this
style, which, for some reason, was not used in its creator’s Bathers
at Asnieres. FTP, name this artistic technique that uses tiny dots of
color to create images, and was pioneered by Georges Seurat. {Dance of
the Hours} (accept “{Valse des Heures}” until the *) One piece by this
name appears right before the dance “Dawn of a New Day” in Act III of
Coppelia. The *more well-known one proceeds “Vieni! Lasciami! Ahime!”
in Act III of its four act opera, and features a short segue into B
minor before the dal segno al fine direction returns it to its E major
key and its repeating sequence of a sixteenth note, a thirty-second
note, and a thirty-second rest, with high octave ascents interspersed.
FTP, name this temporally-titled dance, the best known piece from La
Gioconda by Amilcare Ponchielli. A {Burial at Ornans} or A {Funeral at
Ornans} or Un {Enterrement a Ornans} The three visible children in
this work are a girl in the far right peeking from behind a woman’s
skirt, and two boys in white on the left: one holding a gold-tinted
vessel, the other looking up at one of four grim-looking men in black
hats. A tall staff breaks through the height of the crowd, and a
miniature crucifix can be seen mounted atop it. Among the figures
surrounding the hole in the center are a white and black dog, a man in
green stockings, and a pair of unpleasant looking priests in red, all
standing out from the throngs of sad looking men and women in black.
FTP, name this Gustave Courbet painting of a peasant’s funeral. {Don
Quixote} In Variation II, the composer uses muted brass and winds to
imitate the bleating of the sheep that are mistakenly attacked in that
section. A wind machine is used in Variation VII, and in the ninth and
penultimate variation, two bassoons depict a pair of monks encountered
by the title character, a knight of “sorrowful countenance.” A cello
portrays the title character, and a viola portrays his donkey-riding
squire, in, FTP, what Richard Strauss tone poem about a man from La
Mancha? {St. George} The presence of six drill holes on the top of
this statue’s head indicate that it likely had a helmet or laurel
wreath accessory that has since been lost. Now empty, the clenched
right hand of the statue suggests that a lance or sword is also
missing. Commissioned by the Corazzai guild, this statue depicts its
subject in a stance of military readiness, wearing a cape and armor
and holding a waist-high shield in front of him, thus illustrating him
as the patron of armorers. FTP, name this Donatello statue of the
saint also remembered for slaying a dragon. Gaetano {Donizetti} He
composed the popular tenor aria “Desserto in Terra” for his last
opera, a tragedy about a failed crusade against the Moors entitled Dom
Sebastian, King of Portugal. Censorship of his Poliuto prompted him to
make one of his numerous moves to Paris, where he premiered a comic
opera about the lovers Tonio and Marie. He also wrote a comic opera
about the love of Adina and Nemorino, featuring “Una Furtiva Lagrima,”
in addition to a tragic opera based on a work of Sir Walter Scott.
FTP, name this Italian composer of The Elixir of Love and Lucia di
Lammermoor. {Dog Barking at the Moon} Australian composer Richard
Meale made this painting the subject of the first of his three piece
set based on the work of the artist, using woodwind arpeggios and a
brass and percussion theme to capture the sound of the titular action.
The painting itself is almost entirely brown and black, with the left
side featuring a red-runged ladder extending towards a small red shape
in the sky. Also pictured is a distorted white creature on the right
focusing on a red-tipped white crescent in the sky. FTP, name this
Joan Miro painting of a canine “talking” to the sky at night.
{Chrysler} Building During its construction, the architect was engaged
in a rivalry with the project of Yauso Matsui and his own former
partner H. Craig Severance over which would be taller. The secret
construction of a 185 foot spire inside its tower assured a last
minute victory for this building and its designer. Crafted in Art Deco
style, this structure by William van Alen features gargoyles shaped
like hood ornaments, as well other as other decorative pieces inspired
by designs from automobiles. FTP, name this skyscraper that briefly
was the tallest building in the world before being overtaken by the
Empire State Building. {Toccata and Fugue} in D Minor (prompt on
“Toccata,” do not accept “Dorian Toccata and Fugue in D Minor”) For
the first three measures of its second section, an unaccompanied left
hand plays a sixteenth note melody with alternating A notes in an
Allegro tempo. Not to be confused with its composer’s “Dorian”
combination piece of the same name and key, this work opens in an
Adagio tempo with a mordent and a high A that is held with a fermata.
The organ pedal adds weight to the ascending diminished seventh chord
arpeggio that introduces the sixteenth-note filled Prestissimo
passage, which consists primarily of rapid broken scales and
arpeggios. FTP, identify this ominous-sounding J.S. Bach work
consisting of two pieces in D minor. Charles {Mingus} He departed from
his main instrument to play piano in a 1963 solo album for Impulse
Records, which followed his The Black Saint and the Sinner Lady. He
spent time in Duke Ellington’s band, but an altercation with
trombonist Juan Tizol brought about his reputation as the only
musician ever fired by Ellington. His popular recordings include
Changes I and Changes II, and Let My Children Hear Music. FTP, name
this pioneering jazz bandleader and bass player, who also recorded
Pithecanthropus Erectus. {Peter and the Wolf} The key of C major is
used for both the introductory appearance of the protagonist’s theme
and the closing victory procession, with the latter containing an
underlying oboe theme to remind the audience that one character is
still alive. Commissioned by the director of a local children’s
theater, Natalia Satz, this quasi-educational piece is prefaced by an
expository section in which the narrator reveals that the clarinet
represents the cat and the timpani drums represent a hunting party.
FTP, name this fairy tale Prokofiev piece in which the strings
represent the titular boy and the French horns his lupine adversary.
The {Gulf Stream} The three-sailed white square-rigger that passes by
in the distant horizon of the background may either represent hope or
indifference. Meanwhile, stalks of sugarcane spill out of the cargo
hold of the white vessel at the center of this painting, which also
has a broken mast. As a waterspout moves in the background and sharks
swarm in the foreground, a black man lies stoically on the battered
ship. FTP, name this Winslow Homer painting of a boat adrift in the
waves of the Atlantic. {trumpet} (do not prompt on or accept “cornet”)
A simplistic two movement concerto in D major that Leopold Mozart
wrote in 1762 shows the limited range this instrument had before the
modifications of Anton Weidinger. In 1803, Weidinger commissioned the
concerto in E flat major by Johann Hummel, which showed significant
advancement from the earlier days in which Jeremiah Clarke had written
a namesake voluntary for this instrument. The E flat major concerto of
Franz Josef Haydn is, FTP, another work written for this highest-
pitched of the four major brass instruments. {Portinari} Altarpiece
When closed, it shows a pair of monochromatic scenes, each set in a
simulated niche under an arch: the right half shows Gabriel entering
and raising his staff, while the left shows a bird flying over the
head of a seated Mary as the annunciation occurs. When it is open, the
far right shows Margaret standing atop a dragon and Mary Magdalene
holding a jar of ointment, and the far left shows Thomas and Anthony.
Both side panels also show that the central “Adoration of the
Shepherds” scene is being watched by assorted members of the donating
family, with Maria and her daughter on the right and Tommaso and the
family’s sons on the left. FTP, name this Hugo van der Goes altarpiece
painted for an Italian banking family. {Little Mermaid} It was
designed as a composite of the face of dancer Ellen Price and the
torso of the sculptor’s own wife, Eline. Placed near Langelinie Quay,
this fragile-looking piece by Edward Eriksen was targeted by a 1964
project by the Situationist International art movement, whose leader,
Jorgen Nash, decapitated it to protest consumerism. Another incident
saw dynamite used to blow this bronze statue off its usual perch, a
boulder in the harbor, and still another saw vandals spray paint a bra
and panties on it. FTP, name this oft-abused statue located in
Copenhagen and inspired by a Hans Christian Andersen story.
{sunflower}s The artist once wrote that while the peony belonged to
Georges Jennin and the hollyhock to Ernest Quost, these objects were
his own. Gauguin did an 1888 portrait showing the artist painting
them, and it is said the series of paintings depicting them was
intended to be displayed on the walls of Gauguin’s bedroom. Images of
four-cut and two-cut versions laid out flat comprise the earlier four-
part Paris series, but in the more popular Arles series, these fiery-
colored objects were placed in vases for still-life paintings. FTP,
name these flowers that were a favorite subject of Vincent van Gogh.
Die {Gotterdammerung} or The {Twilight of the Gods} The prologue has
an orchestral interlude depicting a sunrise interrupt a scene of a
frantic descent to the earth in search of a broken rope. The other key
scene of its prologue sees its hero receive the horse Grane as he
begins his journey to the castle of the Gibichungs. Later, his lover
betrays him by revealing that his weak spot is his back, but recants
and prepares a funeral pyre for him after he is speared to death by
Hagen. The opera ends with an epic flooding of the Rhine and the image
of Valhalla in flames. FTP, name this final opera of Wagner’s Ring
Cycle. {Ionic} order In Book IV of Vitruvius’ Ten Books of
Architecture their appearance is compared to that of a shapely matron
wearing flowing robes, and the bead-and- reel, dentil, and egg-and-
dart ornaments on their cornices likened to festive headgear adorning
the large paired volutes on their capitals. In more modern times, they
were used as supports for the Whitehall Chapel by Inigo Jones, though
a major ancient use of them occurred in the Temple of Artemis at
Ephesus. FTP, name this Greek order whose columns were topped by large
scrolling spirals, in contrast to the Corinthian and Doric orders.
Camille {Saint-Saens} He wowed audiences at the Panama-Pacific
exposition with the expressly written chorus, “Hail, California!” and
the oratorio, The Promised Land. His thirteen operas include Ascanio
and Ettiene Marcel, while his works for orchestra and solo instrument
include five piano concertos, the last of which is nicknamed the
“Egyptian,” and the violin pieces Havanaise and Introduction and Rondo
Capriccioso. This man also found success with the last of his three
numbered symphonies, the Organ Symphony, as well as a tone poem that
borrows from the Dies Irae. FTP, name this French composer of Danse
Macabre. The {Jazz Singer} In its prior two years as a Broadway play,
this film had George Jessel in the lead role, though he turned the
movie role down for salary reasons. Its protagonist gets support from
dancer Mary Dale, and ends up winning a role in “April Follies.”
However, the success is bittersweet due to the protestations of Cantor
Rabinowitz, his father, who eventually falls ill. Featuring Jack Robin
singing “Mammy” while wearing blackface, this is, FTP, what 1927 film
starring Al Jolson, the first to feature sound? {Bacchanal} of the
Andrians The most comical image in this painting is that of a putto
naked from the waist down, with a wreath around his head and a dazed
look on his face, urinating into a stream and stumbling drunkenly
towards the naked girl who is about to pass out in the lower right
foreground. A man in red and a woman in white dance in a circle, and
to their right, a man in a white tunic stares at the half-full jug of
wine he holds up. FTP, name this Titian painting of a bunch of people
getting hammered to celebrate the arrival of Dionysus. {can can} One
in the tempo Allegretto Grottesco follows the “Cossack’s Dance” and a
waltz in Ottorino Respighi’s orchestration of Rossini’s The Fantastic
Toyshop. A dance of this type is also performed at Maxim’s by the
Grisettes in Act III of Franz Lehar’s The Merry Widow. Combining
elements of the polka and quadrille, and traditionally performed in
2/4 time, this dance also appears in the ballet Parisian Life. FTP,
identify this high-kicking French dance popularized by Jacques
Offenbach in Orpheus in the Underworld. {Spiral Jetty} In 1999, the
artist’s estate, represented by the James Cohan Gallery, presented
this work as a gift to the Dia Art Foundation. Inspired by a trip to
Ohio’s Great Serpent Mound, the artist traveled to Rozel Point and
hired local contractor Bob Phillips to help him move over 6,000 tons
of basalt, which were arranged into a swirling extension and
photographed from a helicopter. FTP, name this giant Robert Smithson
piece located at the Great Salt Lake. {Hall of Mirrors} or La {Galerie
des Glaces} Approximately fifty candelabras line the walls of the
nearly 100 meter long one in Herrenchiemsee, the largest and most
expensive castle of Mad King Ludwig. The one in Schonbrunn was
allegedly the site of Mozart’s first public recital, performed for the
Hapsburgs. The most famous one, decorated with hanging crystal
chandeliers and busts of Roman emperors, was the product of a
collaboration between Jules Hardouin-Mansart and Charles Lebrun, and
takes its name from the objects positioned directly across from its
seventeen windows. FTP, identify this highly reflective hallway in the
palace of Versailles. The {Bartered Bride} or {Prodana Nevesta} The
protagonist sings “Jak Mozna Verit” as a boast of his shrewd plan,
having made 300 crowns and fooled the villagers, who do not know that
he is the lost eldest son of Tobias Micha. Festivities, including a
circus, form the backdrop of the final act, where the ruse is exposed,
embarrassing the broker Kecal. In the end, Micha’s other son Vasek
humiliates himself by stumbling in dressed as a bear, and the
impending marriage between Jenik and Marenka is celebrated. FTP, name
this Bedrich Smetana opera in which Marenka is sold as a wife-to-be.
{Paul Revere} Three crafting tools rest on the left-center of the
wooden table at the bottom, which also provides a reflection of the
clothes worn by the subject. Wearing a gold-buttoned vest left
unbuttoned, the subject has no jacket on, so the flowing white linen
of his sleeves are exposed. His right elbow rests on the table, with
his hand holding his chin and his face wearing a thoughtful
expression; his left hand holds a silver teapot, which may have been a
commentary on colonial Boston politics. FTP, name this John Singleton
Copley portrait of a man known for his “midnight ride.” Pablo {Casals}
His later years were devoted to using his music to pursue world peace,
such as with his Christmas oratorio The Manger and his Hymn to the
United Nations, whose premiere he conducted just before his 95th
birthday. As a performer, he gained critical acclaim for his
recordings of Bach’s six unaccompanied suites for his instrument,
which he made shortly before leaving his nation for Prades, France in
protest against Francisco Franco’s regime. FTP, name this 20th Century
Spanish cello virtuoso. An {Andalusian Dog} or Un {Chien Andalou} Its
creator borrowed the “Liebestod” from Tristan and Isolde for the
soundtrack of this film, which saw Pierre Batcheff and Simone Mareuil
play its main characters. The action begins when the male lead has a
bicycle accident outside a woman’s house, then builds up into an
attempted rape scene complete with the images of a rope bearing two
monks and two pianos with dead donkeys inside. Featuring a scene with
a woman’s eyeball being slashed with a razor, this is, FTP, what
surrealist short film, a collaboration between Luis Bunuel and
Salvador Dali? {Queen of the Night} or {Astrofiammante} This
character’s first entrance, marked by a recitative and aria, is
followed by a quintet that begins with the lead baritone mumbling,
“Hm, hm, hm, hm” before the padlock around his mouth is removed. In
her first aria, “O Zittre Nicht,” she laments her own suffering, but
later this character, first performed by Josefa Weber, presents her
daughter with a dagger and sings “The Vengeance of Hell is in my
Heart” a fast-paced aria that ascends four times to a high F. FTP,
identify this challenging coloratura soprano role, the mother of
Pamina and rival of Sarastro, who is driven away by the forces of
light at the end of The Magic Flute. {Minute} Waltz or {Dog} Waltz or
Valse du Petit {Chien} This work, the first in its opus of three
dances of the same type, was, like the composer’s Piano Concerto No. 2
in F Minor, dedicated to Countess Delphine Potock. Followed by pieces
in C sharp minor and A flat major, it begins with an A flat trill and
an introductory eighth note theme in seven measures, all of them
centered around the middle of the staff and containing a G natural
accidental. A short dance in 3/4 time set in the key of D flat major,
it was written to mimic the way George Sand’s pet was constantly
chasing its tail. FTP, name this waltz by Frederic Chopin that takes
longer to play than its popular nickname suggests. Gustav {Klimt} His
portrait subjects include the daughter and mother Mada and Eugenia
Primavesi, and the progression of his style can be seen in the
contrast between an early, photo-realistic portrait of a seated Sonja
Knips in a bridal dress and his portrait of his lover Emilie Floge in
a bejeweled purple dress that blends with the streaks of purple and
gold in the background. A sinister skeletal figure lurks to the left
of a huddled mass of colorfully blanketed sleeping figures in his
Death and Life, and his erotic portrayals of women of antiquity is
most evident in his two paintings of Judith. FTP, name this Austrian
Art Nouveau painter of the ornately-colored The Kiss. {Carmen} A
challenging Bohemian Dance is the last of the five movements of Frank
Proto’s double bass fantasy on themes from this work, and Proto’s
suite also contains a nocturne adaptation of Micaela’s aria. Franz
Waxman and Pablo de Sarasate composed virtuoso violin and orchestra
fantasies based on its music, and Vladimir Horowitz often played a
short set of piano variations derived from it as an encore. The
original composer adapted two orchestral suites from the music of this
opera, and pieces from them include an Aragonaise, a Habanera, and
“Los Toreadors.” FTP, identify this French opera about a bullfighter.
{Ship of Fools} Positioned in the center of the titular object is a
wooden tabletop containing a plate of cherries and a metal cup. A
sinister-looking owl hides in the foliage atop of an unusually placed
tree, whose thin trunk is decorated with a red pennant and a roast
goose tied to it. Two naked people, one of them holding up a bowl, can
be seen swimming as a man on the right leans over the edge of the
title object and vomits overboard. A nun strumming a lute and a
singing monk also appear in, FTP, what Hieronymous Bosch painting
showing a bunch of morons in a boat? {Three Places in New England} or
(Charles {Ives}’) {Orchestral Set} No. {1} The final piece in this
series was rearranged for mezzo-soprano and piano and catalogued as
#106 in the composer’s collection, 114 Songs. That piece, which begins
with a soft, fragmented pastoral theme that segues into an English and
French horn narrative melody, and ends in near silence after a
dissonant brass crescendo, was inspired by a poem of the same name by
Robert Underwood Johnson. The first piece pays tribute to a monument,
while the second tells of a child encountering a “tall woman” and a
band of marching soldiers after falling asleep at a Fourth of July
picnic in Redding. FTP, a Saint-Gaudens sculpture, Putnam’s Camp, and
the Housatonic River at Stockbridge form the basis of what trio of
symphonic pieces by Charles Ives? “{When I am Laid in Earth}” (prompt
on “Dido’s Lament”) This G minor aria uses perfect cadences to create
a powerful motif of fate and employs a chromatic five measure ground
bass pattern that lasts ten cycles. It has its singer proclaim, “May
my wrongs create / No trouble in thy breast” and request, “Remember
me, but ah! forget my fate.” Followed by its opera’s final chorus,
“With Drooping Wings,” and preceded by a despair-ridden recitative to
the singer’s sister, “Thy Hand, Belinda,” this is, FTP, what aria sang
just before the death of the Queen of Carthage in Henry Purcell’s Dido
and Aeneas? {Brasilia} (accept “Itamaraty Palace” if someone actually
buzzes before the *) A sculpture of a meteor by Bruno Giorgi can be
found in the reflecting pool of this* city’s Itamaraty Palace. A
C-shaped structure positioned atop a vertical pillar marks its JK
Memorial, which was dedicated to the leader who ordered its
construction. Also of note are the Church of Our Lady of Fatima and
the Palacio da Alvorada, built as the president’s residence. Laid out
in the outline of an airplane in Lucio Costa’s design, this is, FTP,
what planned city featuring the architecture of Oscar Niemeyer, now
the capital of Brazil? {Thirty-Six Views of Mount Fuji} The main
subject is reduced to a distant background image in one scene showing
a man working on a large ring-shaped tub and in another showing groups
of travelers crossing the Oi River, contrasting with its portrayal as
a fiery glowing giant in the “Red” picture. Mannen Bridge, a beach in
Tago Bay, a water mill at Onden, and Inume Pass are other settings in
this series, whose most memorable work is “The Great Wave of
Kanagawa.” FTP, name this Hokusai series featuring three dozen
renditions of a certain volcano. “{Summertime}” A free jazz version of
this song appears between “Billie’s Bounce” and “On Green Dolphin
Street” in Albert Ayler’s 1963 debut album. Dizzy Gillespie’s cover
appears between “Ain’t Misbehavin’” and “Blue Moon” on Cognac Blues,
while Abbie Mitchell was the first to perform it, having sang it
during the “crap game” scene and in the opening scene as Clara during
its opera’s debut. It also is sung in Act 3 by the opera’s female
title character as a lullaby shortly before her would-be abductor
Crown is killed. FTP, “the livin’ is easy, fish are jumpin’, an’ the
cotton is high” in what aria turned jazz staple from Porgy and Bess?
{Prelude to the Afternoon of a Faun} or {Prelude a l’apres-midi d’un
faune} A drawn-out oboe restatement of its main theme leads to its
nebulous closing coda, marked by soft clangs from the antique cymbal
and muted strings and horns, the latter of which being the only brass
scored for in it. Marked by a chromatic descent from C sharp to G
natural and back up, the main melody is introduced by a solo flute,
and the subsequent harp glissandos add to the dreamy and rustic
atmosphere that provides the backdrop for the title character’s
attempt to “perpetuate” some nymphs as he plays his pipes. FTP, a
Stephane Mallarme poem inspired what Claude Debussy tone poem about a
day in the life of a satyr? {Fidelio} The composer used the form of a
canon for the quartet “Mir ist so Wunderbar,” which is sung upon the
re-entry of Jaquino. Soon after, Rocco is ordered to dig a special
grave deep in the prison, and the title character, as the jailer’s
assistant. The second act opens with the mournful “Gott Welch Dunkel
Hier,” but the mood turns hopeful when Florestan recognizes his wife
Leonore, who is disguised as the title character. FTP, identify this
only opera by Ludwig von Beethoven. Jean {Sibelius} Three of his four
string quartets were written by the time he turned 25 in 1890, his
final one was a five movement set in D minor, written nearly 20 years
later and called Voces Intimae. He made his only trip to the U.S. to
attend the 1914 Norfolk Festival, where he premiered his tone poem The
Oceanides. He composed incidental music for The Tempest, as well a
violin concerto in D minor and seven symphonies, having allegedly
burned the score for a planned eighth as he abandoned composing for
the last decades of his life. Cementing his reputation as a
nationalistic composer with the tone poem Kullervo and the
Lemmenkainen Suite, this is, FTP, what composer of Finlandia? {Rain,
Steam, and Speed} or The {Great Western Railway} The central structure
depicted in this work was designed by Isambard Brunel as a means of
connecting Taplow and Maidenhead. Its right side has a farmer working
his fields, while the lower left shows a pair of fishermen sitting in
a tiny boat in the Thames. This painting’s main point of action shows
a rabbit hurrying away from the course of the tracks, as if to show
nature being overwhelmed by machines. FTP, name this stormy painting
of a speeding train on a bridge, a work by Joseph Turner. {Nixon in
China} Act II, Scene 1 takes place on the morning of February 22, and
ends with the protagonist’s wife singing under the Gate of Longevity
and Good Will after spending the day being presented with a glass
elephant and visiting a pig farm. The next scene shows the main
characters interrupt a performance of The Red Detachment of Women,
which was organized by Chiang Ch’ing, the wife of Mao. With a libretto
by Alice Goodman and stage direction by Peter Sellars, this is, FTP,
what John Adams opera about a president’s 1973 visit to the Orient?
{Fountain of the Four Rivers} High atop this work is a dove holding an
olive branch, in homage to the coat of arms of the Pamphili family
that commissioned it. The figures depicted are a bearded man gesturing
up towards the dove, another bearded man wielding an oar in his left
hand, a black man sitting near a pile of coins, and a man with a cloth
obscuring his face to signify how his origins had not yet been
discovered by Europeans. FTP, name this Gianlorenzo Bernini piece
depicting the Danube, Ganges, de la Plata, and the Nile. {Sunday
Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte} Background scenes include
images of a small, white sailboat heading towards the left edge of the
painting and of a group of four men rowing near the shore. In the
center, a woman in a red top and a pink skirt holds the hand of her
hat-wearing child. Sitting in front of a woman in black, a man in a
sleeveless red shirt smokes a pipe in the foreground, all the while
oblivious to the black dog sniffing at the food set down behind him.
On the other side of the foreground, a large-rumped woman holds a
leashed monkey in one hand and an umbrella in the others. FTP, name
this park scene painted by George Seurat. {Venus} of {Willendorf} It
was first mentioned in an article by George MacCurdy of Yale, who had
heard firsthand about Josef Szombathy’s finding of it in a loess
deposit. Roughly eleven centimeters tall, this oolitic limestone piece
has no discernable facial features, just rows of notched concentric
rings resembling braids of hair. Likewise, no arms appear on, FTP,
what ancient carving of a wide-hipped, large-breasted female figure
named for the Austrian town in which it was discovered? {Elijah} One
of the composer’s last minute changes involved expanding its 28th
movement, “Lift Thine Eyes” from a duet into a soprano, soprano, and
alto trio. William Bartholomew, who translated its libretto into
English for its premiere in Birmingham, persuaded the composer from
making another change and omitting the popular contralto aria, “O Rest
in the Lord.” Rather than opening this work, its overture follows a
recitative by the title character, who late sings a duet in which he
announces the resurrection of the Widow’s son before warning the
people of the evil of Baal and facing the wrath of Ahab and Jezebel.
FTP, name this Felix Mendelssohn oratorio about a prophet who ascends
to Heaven in a flaming chariot. {Maple Leaf} Rag Roughly two thirds of
the way into this three minute long piece, it shifts into a short
sixteen measure Trio section in D flat minor, which is highlighted by
four note chords from the right hand. The piece ends without a return
to the jazzy opening melody, which primarily consists of alternating
rising A flat major and minor arpeggios. Published by John Stark and
Sons in 1899, it was composed and named for an African American social
club in Sedalia, Missouri, and helped launch the popularity of ragtime
music. FTP, name this Scott Joplin rag whose nickname also identifies
the symbol on the Canadian flag. {I and the Village} A yellow building
with a cross on top and a priest peeping out of its entrance marks the
center of the distant background, and beside it, green and white
houses surround a red and a blue house that are upside down. A hand
with a ringed forefinger holds a branch in the lower center, and the
image of a milkmaid at work appears within the larger image of a white
cow’s profile that stares eye to eye with a man’s large, green face.
FTP, name this abstract painting depicting Russian peasant life, a
piece by Marc Chagall. {Metropolis} The image of a decimal clock and
of a giant lighted clock with a man frantically trying to turn the
hands help set the otherworldly feel of this film. A reading of the
story of the Tower of Babel provides a parable to the setting, where
wealthy citizens live idyllic lives in a land of giant skyscrapers
while workers live underground like drones and power their machines. A
socialist message underlies the main plot, a love story between the
aristocrat Freder and the worker Maria, who continually exclaims that
“between the head and the hands there must be a heart.” FTP, name this
Fritz Lang film about the titular large, futuristic city. The{ Rape of
the Sabine Women} or The {Abduction of the Sabine Women} (accept close
variants) Pietro da Cortona’s 1629 painting on this theme for the
Sacchetti family takes place against a stormy dark blue sky and shows
a woman in white and blue reaching her open hands out to the sky.
Picasso’s 1963 version shows a woman in red with her breasts exposed
and a crying child beside her both laying on the ground while a
horseback fighter and a nude soldier battle above her. The most well-
known French version shows a man in red on a platform in the upper
left, overseeing his men fending off villagers as they run towards the
left end with captives in their arms. FTP, Nicholas Poussin painted
what event, in which Romulus’ men carried off the women of a nearby
tribe? St. {Cecilia} John Blow’s “Begin the Song” and “The Glorious
Day is Come” were written to honor this figure, and Judith Weir and
Colin Matthews were two of seven contemporary composers who wrote a
set of variations on Henry Purcell’s “Bright” ode to this person.
“From Harmony, From Heavenly Harmony,” was Giovanni Batista Draghi’s
setting of a 1687 John Dryden poem praising this person, while Charles
Gounod’ Solemn Mass and Franz Josef Haydn’s third and longest mass are
alternatively named for her. Benjamin Britten wrote a hymn to, FTP,
which woman labeled as the patron saint of music and composers? Claes
{Oldenburg} His graph-paper drawing, Self Portrait with Equals, and
the preliminary sketches for his Three-Way Plug can be found in his
collection, Printed Stuff. Venice was the setting for his performance
of Il Corso del Coltello, where he unveiled his giant Knife Ship. The
Batcolumn at Chicago, the Split Button on the University of
Pennsylvania campus, and his Clothespin in Philadelphia’s Center
Square Plaza are other large scale collaborations with his partner and
wife, Coosje van Brugen. FTP, name this Swedish-born American artist
known for his giant sculptures of household objects and food. Der
{Freischutz} or The {Free-shooter} Some comic relief is provided in
the soprano’s “Einst Traumte Meiner Sel’gen Base,” which tells a ghost
story in which the “ghost” turned out to be the family dog.
Particularly powerful is the use of heavy drum beats and string
tremolos to set an ominous mood for the midnight scene at the Wolf’s
Glen. A desire to win Prince Ottokar’s contest drives the title
character to accept Caspar’s sinister offer to seek help from the
demonic Zamiel in, FTP, what opera about Max the marksman, a work by
Carl Maria von Weber. I Saw the {Figure Five in Gold} Robert Indiana
made a 1963 variation of this painting that centered on a red star
surrounded by the words “err,” “die,” “hog,” “eat,” and “U.S.A.” in
stenciled letters. The original, done forty five years earlier,
features the name “Bill” in large red letters at the top left, and is
lit up by four round globes at the top that resemble street lamps,
though the main focus is a bright red fire engine with a repeating
logo on it. Based on a William Carlos Williams poem, FTP, what is this
Charles Demuth painting of a giant number? {Hungarian Rhapsodies} A
minor is the most common main key signature for these works, being the
setting for four of them, though none were among the six orchestrated
by Franz Doppler. Lento con Duolo is the tempo marking for the fifth
in E minor, often dubbed the “Heroide Elegiaque.” The bombastic final
one in D minor was inspired by the composer’s countryman, Kornel
Abranyi, while the ninth in E flat major is known as the “Carnival of
Pest,” and the fifteenth contains the “Rakoczy March.” FTP, name this
set of nineteen gypsy themed free form piano pieces composed by Franz
Liszt. The {Firebird} or {L’oiseau de Feu} The tenth of its movements
is a sunrise scene, which is preceded by a dance in a rondo form known
as a khorovad. The inept Anatoly Liadov was originally charged with
the commission for this work, whose music is often performed by
independent orchestra in the form of an abridged suite, typically
including a lullaby and a scherzo that depicts a game played with
golden apples. Ivan’s quest to free thirteen princesses from the ogre
Katschei forms, FTP, the plot of what ballet involving a flaming avian
creature? {Canaletto} or Giovanni Antonio {Canal} Thomas Hollis
commissioned his renditions of the rotunda at Ranelah and the Old
Walton Bridge, and paintings of Warwick Castle, Northumberland House,
and Eton College Chapel are other examples of his work created after
the diplomat Joseph Smith had arranged his move to London. Despite his
election to his hometown’s academy, his late career after his return
to Italy lacked the success that he had built up with his trademark
capriccios and views of the Molo and the Piazza San Marco. FTP, name
this 18th Century painter synonymous with landscapes of the Grand
Canal and other Venice landmarks. {Pomp and Circumstance} Marches
Granville Bantock was the dedicatee of the second one, which contains
an A major trio and a main key of A minor, while Ivor Atkins of
Worcester Cathedral was the dedicatee of the peculiarly dark third one
in C minor. It took 23 years after the completion of the fourth one in
G major before the composer began writing the fifth, and last finished
one in C major. The composer combined the first, and most popular, one
with A.C. Benson’s lyrics for “Land of Hope and Glory” to produce an
ode for the 1902 coronation of Edward VII. FTP, name this series of
Edward Elgar marches linked with graduation ceremonies. The {Alhambra}
A pair of identical slabs of white marble laid in the floor of its
honeycomb-roofed salon lent their name to its Hall of Two Sisters.
Ceiling paintings on leather highlight its Hall of Kings, and plaster
stalactites hang from the ceiling of its Hall of the Ambassadors, used
as a receiving room. A notable external feature in this complex is a
courtyard with a central goldfish-filled pond that is lined by myrtle
trees, or Los Arrayanes. A hand carved over the arch-shaped Gate of
Judgment and possibly symbolizing the five pillars of faith marks the
entrance of, FTP, what palace that contains the Court of Lions, a
historic Moorish fortress in Grenada? {Breathless} or {A Bout de
souffle} In a memorable line from this film, the protagonist responds
to a literary query from his girlfriend by asking if William Faulkner
was one of her ex-lovers, to which she responds by quoting from The
Wild Palms. Influential for its introduction of jump cuts, this film
follows a young criminal who cuts short a trip to Italy and returns to
Paris after killing a policeman, then finds himself betrayed by his
American girlfriend Patricia. FTP, name this New Wave film that ends
with the death of Michel Poiccard, a work by Jean-Luc Godard. {bebop}
This term can be used to describe a Dorian scale with an added major
third or a Mixolydian scale with an added major seventh. A three
volume instructional series on “how to play” it was authored by David
Baker, and it is often characterized by the use of the flatted fifth
interval. Kenny Clarke and Max Roach were the leading percussion
players of this style, which was typically performed in small
ensembles as a movement away from big band era swing. FTP, name this
1940’s brand of jazz popularized by Dizzy Gillespie and Charlie
Parker. {Orpheus and Eurydice} or {Orfeo ed Euridice} This opera opens
with a funeral, and after the mourners leave, the grief- stricken
“Chiamo il Mio Ben Cosi” is sung by the lead character, who is written
as a male alto. As he embarks on his journey, he sings “Deh Placatevi
con Me” to ward off the Furies, and soon the “Dance of the Blessed
Spirits” plays as the gates of the Elysian Fields open. Unlike the
myth it is based on, this opera ends happily with Eros restoring the
second title character to life, even though her lover technically lost
her by making the mistake of looking back at her. FTP, name this
Christoph Gluck opera about a Greek musician and his love. First
{Chicago} School A 1964 history by Carl W. Condit is a definitive
chronicle of this group. A composite of stacked two and three story
layers with brick and stone walls surrounding an inner metal layer
comprises its early Montauk Block, which was soon eclipsed by the
entirely steel and iron-framed Home Insurance Building. Terra cotta
also was a popular material for this group, represented by the
Holabird and Roche and Burnham and Root firms. William Jenney taught
most of the members of, FTP, what skyscraper-pioneering architectural
school of Dankmar Adler and Louis Sullivan, centered in a major
Midwestern city? {Syndics} of the Cloth(maker’s) Guild or {Syndics} of
the Draper’s Guild or The {Staalmeesters} Surprisingly, the central
figure, and only subject in this work wearing a simple skullcap and
standing back in a recess in the wooden wall behind him, is the
servant of the other five subjects. The middle two of the title
characters sit at a table draped by an extravagant gold-patterned red
carpet and flip through a giant logbook. All five of the curly-haired
titular men wear tall black hats, with white bibs around their necks
contrasting with their all-black outfits. The rightmost of them
clutches a bolt of fabric in his hand in, FTP, what Rembrandt group
portrait of officials from a textile guild? A {Young Person’s Guide to
the Orchestra} (accept {Variations and Fugue on a Theme of Purcell}
until the *, prompt after) The trombones and tuba lead an aptly-named
Allegro Pomposo section, after which a two minute Moderato section
showcasing the triangle, cymbals, xylophone, and others in the
percussion section forms the longest and last of the thirteen
variations on the opening theme. For this piece’s finale, an
unaccompanied piccolo introduces a melody, which is repeated at turns
by the other sections and finally the full orchestra in a lively
fugue. Centering around a theme by Henry *Purcell and written to
accompany an educational film, this is, FTP, what Benjamin Britten
work written to teach children about the instruments of the orchestra?
The {Glass of Absinthe} or {L’Absinthe} or {Absinthe Drinkers} The
artist signed his name right under an ashtray on the table in the
foreground, which garnered controversy for its depiction of
celebrities Marcellin Desboutin and Ellen Andree as addicts; the two
are the only people visible in this scene set at the Nouvelle-Athenes
cafe. A scruffy Desboutin with a pipe in his mouth looks off to the
right while dressed in his brown suit and hat. Ms. Andree is the
central figure, wearing a beige and brown dress and a high-seated
white hat as she sits in her booth and stares blankly into space while
an empty bottle and a full serving of the titular drink sit in front
of her. FTP, name this Edgar Degas painting about a wormwood-based
green liqueur. The {Kiss} The most noteworthy changes in the artist’s
revisions of this piece involved the depiction of fingers: in the
original, they are thick, curvy, and well-defined stubs; in the 1923
version they were sharply angled carvings barely differentiable from
the surrounding hair. The piece shares its name with the nickname of
the artist’s Gate at Targu Jiu, whose neighboring carved half-circles
resembles the eyes of the two intertwined figures in the 1908 version
of this sculpture. FTP, name this primitively-styled sculpture series
depicting two lovers embracing, created by Constantin Brancusi.
{flute} (do not accept “recorder”) Frederick the Great was a prolific
composer for this instrument, having been taught by the author of a
1752 treatise on playing it, Johan Quantz. Pierre Buffardin and Michel
de la Barre were its leading French baroque composers, and the
Hotteterre family was credited with developing its transverse variety.
A solo one joins the strings in Bach’s Orchestral Suite #2 in B Minor,
figuring prominently in its Minuet and Badinerie. Traditionally the
featured instrument in the concertos The Night, The Storm at Sea, and
The Goldfinch by Vivaldi, this is, FTP, what woodwind instrument that
does not use reeds and has such variants as the fife and piccolo?
{Manon Lescaut} (the other opera is Jules Massenet’s Manon) The lead
tenor laments the title character’s greed in “Ah… Mi Tradisce,” as
before the intermezzo that precedes Act III, the latter is arrested
while trying to gather up a pile of jewels. “Donna non Vidi Mai,” the
in which the male lead is smitten by the title character while seeing
her exit a stagecoach, and “In Quelle Trine Morbide,” where the title
character regrets running off with the lecherous Treasurer General,
Geronte di Ravior, are the standout arias of this opera, which differs
from a similarly-titled five act counterpart in that the title
character successfully leaves France and makes it to the Louisana
desert before dying in the arms of the student, Des Grieux. FTP, name
this early Puccini hit based on a novel by Abbe Prevost. The {Isle of
the Dead} In each of this painting’s five renditions, a fuzzy mass of
thin and elongated poplar trees fills the center, obscuring the view
of the title location and jutting out into the dark, hazy sky. The
impression of classically styled ruins is given by the stone entryways
carved into the sides. Rock outcroppings on the sides flank the
central approach, towards which a white standing figure and a seated
figure manning a pair of oars row a small boat. A dismal, black-toned
body of water surrounds the titular macabre land mass of, FTP, what
Arnold Bocklin painting that inspired a tone poem of the same name by
Rachmaninoff? Sarah {Siddons} This figure, depicted in what looks like
wedding attire in an oval chalk piece by John Downman, was the subject
of a two volume biography by the poet Thomas Campbell. Other
portrayals include Gilbert Stuart’s solemn and reserved portrait,
George Romney’s neoclassical rendition, and Henry Fuseli’s ghoulish
rendition of the central figure in Lady Constance, Arthur and
Salisbury, inspired by a viewing of King John. Another involves the
image of two ghastly figures standing behind her as she sits in a
throne floating in the dark clouds. FTP, name this actress depicted as
the tragic muse in a portrait by Joshua Reynolds. {Laocoon} Vasari
describes how Leo X commissioned Baccio Bandinelli to make a 1525 copy
of this work, for which Giovanni Montorsoli did an erroneous attempt
at restoration by making a replacement right arm in an outstretched,
rather than a bent position. Giuliano di Sangallo was one of the men
present at Esquiline Hill during the unearthing of this sculpture,
placed at the palace of Titus in Natural History by Pliny the Elder,
and accredited to Agesander, Polydore, and Athenodorus. FTP, name this
classical sculpture group that shows giant snakes killing the
eponymous Trojan priest and his sons. {My Dinner with Andre} The plot
is set in motion by a revelation from a friend that the title
character was moved to tears by a line from Autumn Sonata. The title
character comments that he found “nothing” in India, but also
describes spending time at the Findhorn community, reading On Hasidism
by Martin Buber, watching Tibetan monks meditate in silence, and
exploring the Sahara. Occasionally responding to show satisfaction
with his own mundane life, theater actor Wallace Shawn mostly finds
himself listening to the title character’s ramblings in, FTP, what
Louis Malle film following an evening-long restaurant conversation?
{Clara} Wieck {Schumann} (accept “Clara {Wieck}” until her maiden name
is mentioned) This composer’s diary reveals the existence of such now-
lost works as the song “The Dream,” with text by Christoph Tiedge and
the song “The Wanderer,” set to the text of Justinus Kerner. A
translated version of Robert Burns’ “On the Shore” and many poems by
Friedrich Ruckert, Hermann Rollett, and Heinrich Heine, including “The
Lorelei” can be found in this composer’s collection of intact songs. A
piano concerto in A minor and set of three violin and piano romances
written for Joseph Joachim are the most celebrated instrumental works
by this composer, whose marriage was the result of a lawsuit against
her father, Friedrich Wieck. FTP, identify this pianist and wife of a
certain German composer named Robert. Allegory of {Good Government}
The letters “CSCV” arch over the head of a larger-than life enthroned,
bearded man, who represents this painting’s titular entity. Labeled
female depictions of Peace, Fortitude, and Prudence sit on his left;
Magnanimity, Temperance, and Justice sit on his right, while Faith,
Charity, and Hope float over his head. A companion piece showing
villagers doing daily errands in a bustling town full of red and blue
buildings and another showing farmers tending their crops in a hilly
rural landscape illustrate the title institution’s effects in the city
and the countryside, while a horned blue figure labeled “Tyranny” and
a ruined city are the highlights of the dilapidated fresco depicting
its “bad” counterpart. Located in the Palazzo Publico in Sienna, this
is, FTP, what Ambrogio Lorenzetti fresco about a benevolent ruling
body? {Guggenheim} Museum of {Bilbao} Shortly before its opening
festivities, police foiled a plot involving terrorists hiding grenades
in Jeff Koons’ giant flower sculpture of a puppy, which stands outside
its entrance. The curvy sculptural tower on its eastern side is
intersected by the La Salve Bridge, which cuts it off from this
building’s vaguely boat-shaped main section. With its exterior walls
plated in shiny titanium, it features an over-150 feet tall central
atrium that connects its nineteen galleries and echoes the giant
rotunda in its Frank Lloyd Wright- designed counterpart in New York.
FTP, name this art museum located in a Basque city and designed by
Frank Gehry. The Dying {Swan} An oft-told anecdote claims its original
performer’s beloved pet, Jack, inspired its 1905 creation. Wearing a
white cap or head-garland, the performer enters the center, and
circles around and performs several bourrees to the tune of an
independently famous programmatic 3 minute Adagio piece traditionally
scored for a solo cello accompanied by a harp or two pianos. As the
finale approaches, the dancer returns to the center, makes several
failed attempts at motion before falling on one knee and performing a
dramatic port- de-bras with her arms to symbolize the snapping of the
neck. FTP, name this solo ballet routine set to a piece from Carnival
of the Animals depicting a moribund bird, the signature routine of
Anna Pavlova. {Two Fridas} or Las {Dos Fridas} The title characters
sit on a green-legged bench and hold hands, with a cloudy gray sky
filling the space behind them. The figure on the right wears a purple
and yellow sleeveless top and a white-edged brown skirt, and is
connected to the other figure by an elongated artery that wraps around
and joins both of their exposed hearts. The figure on the left,
holding a pair of scissors, is a mirror of her counterpart, but
instead provides an image of the artist wearing a white European-
styled wedding dress to contrast with the image of her in native
Mexican attire. FTP, identify this dual self portrait by Kahlo.
{symphonies} by Piotr Ilich {Tchaikovsky} (prompt on a partial answer,
accept {Tchaikovsky}’s {Symphony #5} in E Minor before the *) An
Andante Cantabile second movement with a memorable French horn solo
and an Allegro Moderato waltz used in place of a traditional third
movement scherzo or minuet characterize the *fifth in E minor. The
fourth one in F minor ends with an Allegro con Fuoco finale and was
written around a fate motif and dedicated to Madame von Meck. The
second in C minor and third in D major were both nicknamed after
countries, and the last one, in B minor, concludes with a deeply
tragic Adagio Lamentoso movement that served as the composer’s death
knell. An unnumbered piece based on “Manfred” is also counted among,
FTP, what body of work by what composer that includes the Winter
Dreams, Little Russia, and Pathetique? Benjamin {West} He anticipated
the Pre-Raphaelite movement with such Shakespearean paintings as The
Damsel and Orlando and King Lear in the Storm, and was the subject of
two biography editions by John Galt. Though largely self-taught, he
studied under William Williams and Gustavus Hesselius and produced a
wide range of historical paintings, covering subjects from The Death
of Epaminondas to Edward III Crossing the Somme. Unlike Albert Pinkham
Ryder’s desolate, empty scene painted over a century later, he painted
a chaotic, crowded scene of a grim massacre in his Death on a Pale
Horse, but this Pennsylvanian made his name as the president of the
Royal Academy and artist of Penn’s Treaty with the Indians. FTP, name
this painter who showed an Indian and a band of redcoat soldiers
looking over their fallen leader at the Plains of Abraham in his The
Death of General Wolfe. {William Tell} or {GuillaumeTell} or
{Guglielmo Tell} The trio “Giuriam, Giuriam Pei Nostri Danni” ends its
second act, whose second half mainly involves discussions of
revolution between the title character, his ally Gualtiero, and the
younger Melcthal, a notoriously high range tenor role that performs
the arias “O Muto Asil” and “Corriam, Voliam!” Roughly six hours in
length when performed in entirety, this opera is framed by a romance
between Mathilde and Arnoldo, and by the title character’s struggle
against the Austrian tyrant Gessler. Most remembered for the energetic
cavalry charge melody that forms the final part of its overture, this
is, FTP, what Gioacchino Rossini opera about a Swiss archer who shoots
an apple off his son’s head? The Love {Letter} Two calm landscapes
appear on the back wall: one of a sailing ship at sea, the other of
trees in a light wind. The artist’s signature is lower and on the left
side of the wall, beneath a gold filigree decoration and above a
laundry basket set aside. On the visibly wet black and white tiled
floor, a broom has also been set aside as a curtained doorway frames
the scene of a housemaid, wearing a white cap on her head, presenting
her mistress, clad in yellow, with the titular object. FTP, identify
this picture of a woman holding a lute in one hand and a sealed
envelope in the other, painted by Jan Vermeer. The {Age of Bronze} or
{L’Age d’Airain} (accept “The {Vanquished}” on an early buzz) The
photographs Gaudenzio Marconi took of its plaster cast and of its
model, Auguste Neyt, were used by the artist to defend himself against
accusations that he cast this work directly from a live model. This
statue’s empty left hand was originally supposed to hold a spear,
while its right hand is placed atop the crown of his head. First
exhibited as in Brussels as “The Vanquished,” this is, FTP, what
Auguste Rodin sculpture of a nude soldier with a grandiose title that
reflects the alloy from which it was made? {Symphony #1} or {Sea}
Symphony It ends with an epic 30 minute long movement beginning with a
Grave e Molto Adagio section and the lines “Oh vast Rondure, swimming
in space” in a depiction of the work “The Explorers.” Featuring an
Allegro Brillante scherzo as its third movement, it calls for a chorus
and solo soprano and baritone parts in addition to the standard
symphony orchestra. A musical setting of four poems from Walt
Whitman’s Leaves of Grass, it premiered in the same year as its
composers Fantasia on a Theme of Thomas Tallis. FTP, name this Ralph
Vaughn Williams symphony with a maritime nickname. Paul {Gauguin} An
1889 studio portrait by him shows the two daughters and wife, Louise,
of the friend he would later cuckold, Claude-Emile Schuffenecker. He
entered his first major exhibition with a nude entitled Suzanne
Sewing, although a vacation with Charles Laval several years later saw
him produce Comings and Goings and Tropical Vegetation, which would
anticipate his later work. Of his many self-portraits, perhaps the
most recognizable are his one “near Golgotha” and another entitled Les
Miserables, while his other trademark subjects include Breton peasant
women and primitive scenes like The Moon and the Earth. FTP, name this
Post-Impressionist, who painted The Yellow Christ and spent his last
years living in Tahiti. El Temple Expiatori de la {Sagrada Familia} or
Expiatory Temple of the {Holy Family} A block-headed Christ on a
crucifix, a group of shrouded figures, and several futuristic-looking
knights appear in this structure’s controversial Passion façade,
designed by the cubist Josep Subirachs. Mosaics, fruit-adorned
crosses, and the words “Sanctus,” “Hosanna,” and “Excelsis” appear on
its high towers, whose planned number was intended to allude to the
evangelists, the apostles, Mary, and Jesus. FTP, name this still-
unfinished Art Nouveau church, whose design was primarily the work of
Antoni Gaudi. {Trout} Quintet or Die {Forelle} This work’s central
movement is placed between a Presto scherzo with a D major trio and
the Allegro Giusto finale that forms its fifth movement and returns it
to a key with three sharps. The main movement features a set of the
same number of variations as instruments in the ensemble it is scored
for, all based on an Andantino theme that was the melody from an
earlier lied the composer wrote about the struggle between a gamesman
and his prey. Featuring a double bass in the ensemble in place of a
traditional second violin, this is, FTP, what Franz Schubert piano
quintet about a fish? Dave {Brubeck Quartet} Fred Dutton, Herb Barman,
and Lloyd Davis briefly held spots during the formative period of this
group, which made its home at the Blackhawk night club. Jazz: Red,
Hot, and Cool was one of their last albums before drummer Joe Dodge
left in favor of Joe Morello, which also led to Eugene Wright becoming
the new bassist. Primarily led by Paul Desmond and their eponymous
pianist, they struck it big with an album that featured “Pick up
Sticks,” “Blue Rondo a la Turk,” and a piece that famously used 5/4
time. FTP, name this long-running jazz foursome whose album Time Out
featured the hit “Take Five.” Der {Blaue Reiter} or The {Blue Rider}
The painting bearing this name was completed in 1903 and shows the
titular hooded figure streaking across a blurry green hillside with
orange trees in the background. This title also describes a more
monochromatic drawing by the same artist with the title figure clad in
the outfit of a knight, which appeared on the cover of an eponymous
almanac. Alfred Kubin and Gabriele Munter were lesser figures
associated with the group of the same name, which focused on abstract
and expressionistic themes in nature, and also counted Paul Klee among
its members. FTP, give the colorful name that describes the Munich
based, World War I-era art movement founded by Franz Marc and Wassily
Kandinsky. {etude}s A set of five of them, including “Fifths to
Thirds” and “For the Left Hand Alone” comprises an eponymous John
Corigliano “Fantasy.” This term also was the title of Theodore
Presser’s magazine for American music scholars, and in the title of
two nine part Rachmaninoff sets, is followed by the word “Tableaux.”
Moriz Moszkowski wrote fifteen “Virtuoso” ones for piano, and stands
with Carl Czerny and Johann Baptiste Cramer as a leading composer of
these teaching pieces for the instrument. FTP, name this type of
technical piece, which also describes a “Transcendental” Liszt series
and a “Revolutionary” Chopin piece. Antonio {Canova} At age thirteen,
he began his studies under Torretto, and by age sixteen, he had
produced his first major work: a statue of Eurydice for his patron,
Giovanni Falieri. He also executed the statue groups Daedalus and
Icarus and Theseus and the Minotaur before being chosen to work at St.
Peter’s Basillica for the tomb of Innocent XIII, whose entrance is
guarded by a pair of lions he sculpted. In 1802, he was summoned to
Paris, where created a giant nude statue of Napoleon as Mars. FTP,
name this neoclassicist who also sculpted Paulina Borghese as Venus.
The {Family of Charles IV} or The {Family of Carlos IV} The left half
of a generic landscape scene appears on the right end of the wall,
while a painting that some scholars have identified as a depiction of
Lot and his daughters hangs on the left, heavily obscured by the
shadows. Fourteen figures appear in this painting, including a little
boy in a red velvet suit, a grotesque looking woman in the center in a
gold dress holding the hand of the boy and putting her other arm
around a similarly dressed girl, and the artist himself, a bald man in
the back standing at his easel in the darkened left corner. Noted for
its unflatteringly realistic depiction of its royal subjects, this is,
FTP, what Francisco Goya painting of a Bourbon king and his relatives?
{Concerto for Orchestra} (accept “{Game of Pairs}” or “{Giuoco delle
Coppie}” before the *, and prompt before its name mentioned) A short
opening drum solo prefaces the rotation of themes by bassoons in
sixths, oboes in thirds, clarinets in sevenths, flutes in fifths, and
muted trumpets in seconds that comprises the bulk of its second
*movement, a scherzo called the “Game of Pairs.” A mysterious string
and wind passage backed by rippling harp flourishes opens its mournful
third movement Elegia, also alluding back to its introductory Allegro
Vivace movement, which features the flute as the first of many
sections to be highlighted in a solo. A 1943 composition in five
movements, this is, FTP, what wide-ranging concerto by Bela Bartok?
Andrea {Mantegna} Minerva can be seen wielding a staff and expelling
the vices from a holy garden in his Triumph of Virtue, which, along
with an oil-on-canvas showing Mars and Venus elevated above Parnassus,
was painted for Isabella d’Este. The Madonna of the Caves and Madonna
della Vittoria are his best-known depictions of Mary, while the St.
Luke and St. Zeno polyptychs are his most famous altarpieces. His
left-oriented setting of the Agony in the Garden is often compared to
that of his brother-in-law, Giovanni Bellini, and the illusory image
of cherubs peering down from a cloudy sky highlights his ceiling
fresco for the Camera degli Sposi. FTP, name this Northern Italian
master of foreshortening and perspective, painter of the Dead Christ
and a series of frescos showing the life of St. James. The {Ten
Commandments} A possible critique of excessive strictness in religion
can be seen in a mother’s regretful dying claim that she taught her
son “to fear God instead of to love Him.” That mother, Mrs. McTavish,
dies in the collapse of a church built from shoddy concrete that her
immoral son Danny had skimped on in order to make extra money.
Meanwhile, Danny’s wife, Mary Leigh, fears she has been branded a
sinner, but finds spiritual redemption from Danny’s pious brother
John. Meanwhile, the first half of this 1923 film is an epic retelling
of the story from Exodus. FTP, name this Cecil B. Demille film, which
shares its title with his 1956 biblical epic that starred Charlton
Heston and Yul Brynner. Music from the {Royal Fireworks} The tempo
Largo alla Siciliana and a 12/8 time signature are the directions for
its trill-filled third movement, entitled “La Paix,” which is followed
by an Allegro Spiritoso movement called “Le Rejouissance.” This
suite’s fifth and last movement is a set of two minuets with a brief
shift to D minor before a final return to its main key of D major.
Commissioned by George I to celebrate the end of the War of Austrian
Succession, this work saw its premiere spoiled when the titular
objects ignited the scaffolding. FTP, name this suite by George
Frederic Handel. Gustave {Eiffel} His most noteworthy project in Asia
is a bridge spanning the Rach Lang River in Saigon. The wife of Luis I
was the namesake of his bridge over the Douro in Porto, Portugal; like
many of his trademark bridges, that structure, the Pia Maria Bridge,
was an arched metallic railway bridge. For a 1900 exhibition, he
created a popular beehive-shaped rotunda known as La Ruche. He also
had success designing the cupola for the Nice Observatory, though his
career was hurt by his ties to the corrupt Ferdinand Lesseps in a
failed project to build locks for a Panama Canal. FTP, identify this
French architect who worked with Frederic Bartholdi on the Statue of
Liberty and lent his name to a certain tower in Paris. The {Love for
Three Oranges} An unusual case of “incurable hypochondria” afflicts
the royal hero of this work, whose opening is prefaced by a scene of
cranks, empty-heads, tragedians, and other factions having a
boisterous argument. The black slave- girl Smeraldina joins the evil
Clarissa and Leandro in plotting to keep the prince from laughing, but
he does so inadvertently after seeing the witch Fata Morgana, and is
punished by being stricken with the titular condition as a result. A
popular march highlights Act II, after which the prince sets out with
his jester Truffaldino to find the title objects and free Princess
Ninetta, in, FTP, what commedia-del-arte inspired Sergei Prokofiev
opera about the prince’s desire for a trio of citrus fruits? The {Hay
Wain} The third of a series of works that also includes The Leaping
Horse and The Lock, this painting showcases a body of water that was
also featured in the artist’s Scene on a Navigable River. The cottage
of Willy Lott appears on the left edge of this painting, with its
small red chimney sticking out on its right edge, whose lower part is
obscured by shrubbery. Flatford Mill also appears in this painting, in
which a spotted brown and white dog waits by the banks of the shallow
Stour River as two men sit in its center, pulled by two black oxen.
FTP, name this Stafford landscape scene centering on a wagon and
painted by John Constable. {clarinet} In Papa Jack Laine’s Reliance
Band, the brothers Harry and Larry Shields played this instrument.
When performing, Fess Williams and George McClennon used it to produce
dissonant honks and squeaks for comic effect in the “gashouse” style
of playing this instrument, popularized by Ted Lewis, who also hired
Jimmy Dorsey to play it in his band. Cole Porter’s “Begin the Beguine”
was the breakthrough hit for the man called the “king” of FTP, what
single reed woodwind instrument played by Artie Shaw and his rival
Benny Goodman? {Hercules} and {Antaeus} (the order doesn’t matter
since it’s not asking for a title) The National Gallery of Art holds a
1520 ceramic bowl by Giorgio Andreoli depicting these two characters.
The most famous sculptor of them also did a 1475 tempura on wood
rendition that may have been aided by his brother Piero. Created for
the Medici palace, the bronze depicts one character with his head
thrust back and mouth agape in pain as he pushes his hands against the
other title character, who is thrusting him into the air with his hips
and squeezing the life out of him. A statue by Antonio Pollaiuolo
depicts, FTP, what Greek hero known for his twelve labors and what
nigh-invincible son of Earth that he killed in an epic wrestling
match? Fernand {Leger} A slanted picture of a fish, blots of yellow
and black, and a round blue keychain accent his 1930 take on the Mona
Lisa. One of his trademarks, randomly placed background streaks of
bright colors, usually red, yellow, and blue, that overlap the main
subject matter, can be seen in his Two Women Holding a Flower and The
Great Parade. Like Picasso, he did a painting called The Three
Musicians and experimented with cubism, a product of which was his
painting of three generic nude women sitting down for lunch. Machines
and industry were his favorite subjects, resulting in images of tubes
and girders appearing in many of his paintings, like his series
depicting construction workers. FTP, name this French abstract painter
of The City. {Scarlatti} The earlier one wrote the cantata Correa nel
seno amato and an oratorio about Hagar and Ishamel, while Telemaco and
Mitridate Eupatore rank among the best of his many operas, where he
pioneered the use of ritornello, overtures, and the da capo aria. The
younger one only composed seven operas, among them Narciso, preferring
to write instrumental pieces such as his 30 Essercizi and a prolific
number of sonatas for the harpsichord. FTP, give the common surname
shared by the Italian baroque composer Alessandro and his son
Domenico. {Monticello} Covered passages extending from its cellar lead
to kitchen and cooking facilities on its south and a horse stable and
carriage bay on its north, which comprise its perpendicularly oriented
dependency wings. Its most recognizable face is its southwest portico,
supported by an inner row of two and an outer row of four Doric
columns, though this house also incorporated Corinthian and Ionic
elements in other rooms. Much of its second floor is concealed by a
Doric entablature surrounding its perimeter and by the balustrade on
its bright red roof, though its oculus-containing third floor dome,
modeled after that of the Villa Rotonda, is this American landmark’s
most prominent feature. FTP, name this Charlottesville, Virginia house
that was once the residence of Thomas Jefferson. “{Jupiter}, the
Bringer of Jollity” The theme from this movement’s Andante Maestoso
section was combined with Cecil Spring-Rice’s lyrics for the hymn
“Thaxted” or “I Vow to Thee My Country.” A bouncing pastoral dance,
led by the brass and then by the high woodwinds upon its later
repetition, serves as a transitory section that leads to the return of
the opening Allegro Giocoso passage consisting of a swirling string
buildup into a powerful brass fanfare that also exhibits a sense of
joy, as this piece’s subtitle suggests. Placed in between movements
subtitled “The Winged Messenger” and “The Bringer of Old Age,” in a
seven part suite, this is, FTP, what piece subtitled “The Bringer of
Jollity,” Gustav Holst’s composition depicting the largest of the
planets? “{Sing, Sing, Sing} (With a Swing)” In its most famous
performance, it was blended in with passages from Chu Berry’s
“Christopher Columbus.” The declaration that “music brightens up my
day” and the order to “stick around, shake it down” were in the lyrics
written to be performed by Helen Ward, but ironically this piece made
its name as an instrumental instead. Louis Prima composed the music
for this song, which was performed as the finale of its band’s
renowned 1938 concert at Carnegie Hall, featuring epic solos on the
piano by Jess Stacy and on the drums by Gene Krupa. FTP, identify this
swing band classic by Benny Goodman, whose title consists of the same
verb being repeated three times. {Susanna and the Elders} Little
attention is given to the background, a slightly cloudy blue sky and a
stone bench, in this painting now held at Weissenstein Castle in
Pommersfeld. A dark haired man in brown hangs over the left of the
bench, his face obscured as he whispers to his companion, a bearded
man in red who places his finger over his mouth to direct the title
character to hush. Wearing only a white cloth that covers her left
thigh and showing her left breast, the title character sits on the
bench, pushes her hands out, and recoils away in visible distress.
FTP, name this first signed painting of Artemisia Gentileschi,
depicting a Apocryphal woman receiving unwanted advances from her
village leaders. The {Telephone} In the first break in this work’s
plot, the female lead foreshadows by mentioning Jane and Paul’s
impending marriage in her conversation with Margaret. In the fourth
episode, she vents to Pamela as a reaction to the third episode, where
she has a teary argument with George and goes to get a handkerchief,
prompting her boyfriend to make a failed attempt to cut the cord of
the titular device with a pair of scissors so her can propose to her
before his train leaves. Often performed before the composer’s 1946
tragedy The Medium, this one act opera ends with Ben making his
proposal to Lucy by leaving her apartment and contacting her from a
booth on a street corner. FTP, name this Gian-Carlo Menotti opera
about Lucy’s obsession with talking via a remote communication device.
Alexander {Calder} He produced a brass sculpture called Dog and Duck
at age eleven, although a wood carving called The Flattest Cat is
sometimes cited as his first real sculpture. Inspired by his early
career sketching circus animals, he produced a bunch of abstract
miniatures to form a “Cirque” of his own, during which he developed
his trademark pieces. His friend Jean Arp called his metallic,
freestanding still sculptures stabiles, while Marcel Duchamp coined
the term for the other major category of his work. FTP, name this
American sculptor of Lobster Trap and Fish Tail and many other wire
mobiles. {Op Art} (accept “{Kinetic Art}” before the *) Its spread to
Latin America can be seen in the Physichromie series of Carlos Cruz-
Diez and the Coloritmos of Alejandro Otero, both leading figures of
its Venezuelan school. The painter of Orange Crush, Larry Poons, and
the Israeli-born creator of three dimensional Agamograph pieces,
Yaacov Agam, also were associated with this movement. The coining of
its name is alternately attributed to *sculptor George Rickey or an
article in Time Magazine, and the man labeled as its first
practitioner is the creator of Zebra, Victor Vasarely. FTP, identify
this modern art movement also represented by Bridget Riley and The
Responsive Eye exhibit, whose gimmick was producing artwork that
played tricks on the human eye. {Capriccio Espagnol} or {Spanish
Caprice} A wistful, yet majestic Andante con Moto theme is introduced
by the four brass horns scored for in it, then repeated and led in
succession by the strings, the English and French horns, and then a
full orchestra. After this second section of variations, the brisk
opening dance is repeated in a different key. The fourth of its five
continuous sections showcases a solo violin and the flute, clarinet,
and harp in the series of cadenzas that highlight the “Scene and Gypsy
Song.” The final movement, an Asturian-style fandango, closes out this
piece with a climactic coda marked by the return of the melody from
the opening “morning dance,” or “Alborada.” FTP, name this Nikolai
Rimsky-Korsakov work based on folk music from Spain. {Descent from the
Cross} or {Deposition} A red sun in the upper left illuminates Max
Beckmann’s 1917 version, and shows a black hooded figure looking at
the viewer and holding the arm of an old woman in red, who uses her
hands to the hide the grisly sight of a dying, emaciated figure. One
Italian Mannerist version features a setup with three high ladders and
gives the central figure an unearthly greenish tint; while a famous
Flemish altarpiece shows this scene with a red-robed John supporting
the pale, fainting figure of a blue-robed Mary, placed parallel to the
unnaturally bent Jesus. FTP, Rosso Fiorentino and Rogier van der
Weyden, in addition to Ruebens, painted what scene showing Christ’s
body being carried down after his crucifixion? The {Three-Cornered
Hat} or El {Sombrero de Tres Picos} The composer quotes Beethoven’s
Fifth Symphony in the penultimate dance to coincide with the police
knocking at the door of the miller’s house. “The Grapes” and “The
Neighbors’ Dance,” the latter a seguidilla, are other dances in this
work, whose plot follows the comical efforts of a local official to
seduce the miller’s wife. Ending with a spirited jota as its finale,
this ballet was adapted from Pedro de Alarcon’s novel, El Corregidor y
la Molinera. FTP, identify this Manuel de Falla ballet that takes its
title from the magistrate’s head adornment. {Washington Crossing the
Delaware} (Colescott’s painting was George Washington Carver Crossing
the Delaware) A 1975 parody of this work showing a cigar-smoking man
in a top hat strumming a banjo, Aunt Jemima baring her behind, and
Uncle Ben manning an oar was done by Robert Colescott, with the
original subject being replaced by a similarly named contemporary
historical figure. The original version of it was destroyed by Allied
bombing in Bremen, though another 1850 copy hangs in the Metropolitan
Museum of Art. In it, chunks of ice fill the surrounding waters, and
the impending sunrise casts a radiant aura to the central vessel, with
the titular subject clad in military attire, standing on one knee
towards the front as two men behind him cling to a rolled up American
flag, both looking towards the approaching shore. FTP, identify this
Emanuel Leutze painting of the future first president making his way
towards Trenton. {Harold in Italy} or {Harolde en Italie} A ritornello
to simulate the music of rustic pifferari bands is used in the third
movement serenade of this piece, which, as the composer described in
Chapter 45 of his Memoirs, was inspired by his travels in the Abruzzi
countryside. The closing movement revisits earlier themes, like the
pilgrims’ march of the second movement, before descending into a
chaotic “Orgy of Brigands.” The title character, who is placed “In the
Mountains” in the title of the first movement, is represented by a
viola part that was written for Niccolo Paganini. FTP, name this
symphonic Hector Berlioz piece about a Lord Byron character in the
titular country. Paris {Opera} (accept “{Opera Garnier}” on an early
buzz) Opulent mosaics and chandeliers respectively line the floor and
ceiling of its Grand and Avant foyers, while eight Gobelin tapestries
and a ceiling by Georges Clairin adorn its rotunda, called the Salon
du Glacier. Bronze sculptures like the Pythia, many of them bearing
torch-lamps, by a woman who called herself Marcello decorate the
ornately lit double stairway that forms this building’s Grand
Staircase. Most notable among its exterior decoration are two gilded
statues on the left and right of its high roof, which surround its
central green copper dome, and a plaster relief called The Dance,
located near its entrance halls and sculpted by Jean Carpeaux.
Featuring an enormous chandelier and a ceiling repainted by Marc
Chagall in the auditorium where the audience would come to watch
performances, this is, FTP, what Charles Garnier- designed building
that saw the staging of many works by Lully and Rameau? William
{Blake} He used the color blue to signify the spiritual nature of
Vergil in his roughly 100 watercolor illustrations for The Divine
Comedy, which were commissioned by John Linell. The Book of Revelation
was the basis of his bizarre four part watercolor series depicting
Satan and including The Great Red Dragon and the Woman Clothed in Sun.
His most famous drawing depicts a white-bearded God kneeling down in
front of a glowing central orb and emitting twin rays of light into
the black sky through his outstretched hand. That work, The Ancient of
Days, appeared as the frontispiece to his book, Europe: A Prophecy.
FTP, name this British artist and engraver also remembered as the
author of Songs of Innocence and Songs of Experience. “{Anvil Chorus}”
or “{Chi del Gitano i Giorni abbella}!” or “{Vedi! La Fosche Notturne
Spoglie}” An opening G major Allegro melody from the strings
consisting of two short E to F sharp trills with D sharp accidentals
followed by eighth note staccatos and descending sixteenth notes
introduces this operatic selection. Exhorting on the brightness of the
wine in their glasses, the singers complete it right before the start
of a trill-heavy mezzo aria about a woman’s burning at the stake,
“Stride la Vampa.” When the singers enter, they remark on how the dawn
has caused the clouds in the night sky to disperse, and build up to a
boisterous refrain about how what raises their spirits most are their
beautiful gypsy women. FTP, name this chorus from Act II of Il
Trovatore, highlighted by the clang of the titular percussion
instrument. Andy {Warhol} One of Sissy Spacek’s earliest roles was an
eventually cut scene in this producer’s film, Trash. Another celebrity
encounter story tells how Jim Morrison was removed by his manager and
replaced by Tom Baker as the star of his, I, A Man; Baker also starred
in his Imitation of Christ. He used a 3D glasses gimmick for his
X-rated adaptation of Frankenstein, and cast three drag queens and
created a satirical feminist group named “PIG” for his production of
Women in Revolt, which was directed by Paul Morrissey and served as a
dig at his perennial antagonist Valerie Solanas. FTP, name this man
who directed an eight hour film of the Empire State Building, produced
underground films from his “Factory,” and also did paintings of Coca
Cola bottles and Campbell’s Soup cans. {Leningrad} Symphony or
Shostakovich’s Symphony #{7} (require Shostakovich in the answer until
mentioned) In an act itself parodied by Bartok, the composer seemingly
borrowed a melody from the song “You’ll Find Me at Maxim’s” from The
Merry Widow, which may be an in-joke since his own son was named
Maxim. The composer downplayed the alleged jingoism of this work in
his memoir of uncertain authenticity, Testimony, and claimed he
originally titled its movements, calling this symphony’s third
movement Adagio “Native Expanses” to wax eloquent on the vastness of
his nation. Meanwhile, its Allegretto first movement contains a much-
repeated march and snare drum beat to simulate the movement of
invading Nazi troops. FTP, identify this Dmitri Shostakovich symphony
written during the siege of the titular city. The {Sorcerer’s
Apprentice} The hushed viola melody that precedes the sudden and
forceful orchestral ending chord acts as the title character’s
sheepish expression of remorse for the trouble he has caused. Roughly
a minute into this piece, a loud brass interjection previewing the
main melody disrupts the muted woodwind and violin opening and acts as
the incantation that sets the chaotic events of the plot into motion.
The bassoon section leads the intense swirling melody that symbolizes
tools coming to life and rapidly filling the title character’s abode
with water in this orchestral scherzo based on a Goethe poem about a
callow youth trying to imitate his master. FTP, name this Paul Dukas
composition, whose use in Fantasia brings to mind images of Mickey
Mouse in a wizard’s hat. The {Tempest} (do NOT accept “The Bride of
the Wind”) This title names a 1909 Maxfield Parrish landscape of a
sunset on a rocky seaside cliff. A watercolor of this name shows a man
in black on the lower right shielding himself from a surge of waves
radiating from a glowing figure on the left, and is a James Henry
Nixon painting inspired by a work of Shakespeare. It is also an
alternate title for a 1914 painting set in a swirling black and blue
background and showing two prone lovers spooning, one being Alma
Mahler, the other being the artist, Oskar Kokoschka. FTP, give this
common title that also refers to a painting of a storm by Giorgione.
Charles {Bulfinch} He nearly put himself into bankruptcy building a
curved line of townhouses that was demolished after an 1872 fire, the
Tontine Crescent, also called Franklin Place. Harrison Gray Otis hired
him to build three different houses, and this man was also charged
with expanding the John Smibert-built Faneuil Hall. A Harvard
graduate, he designed its University Hall, though this pioneer of
American Federal Style had his biggest success completing a building
that William Thornton and Benjamin Latrobe had began for the U.S.
government. FTP, name this architect who designed the rotunda and dome
for the U.S. Capitol. {Louis XIV} A charcoal sketch of a seated woman
holding a sword rests behind this subject, who has his own bejeweled
gold sword affixed to his waist, wears exposed white garters, and
stands on red-heeled platform shoes to compensate for his short
stature. Standing under the canopy of a gold-trimmed red curtain, he
leans on a gold walking stick positioned in front of his set-aside
crown, gives a detached, aloof look at the viewer from beneath his
curly black wig and wears a sweeping blue robe decorated with a gold
fleur de lise motif. FTP, so describes Hyacinthe Rigaud’s 1701
portrait of what French monarch, nicknamed the “Sun King?” {Prelude in
C Sharp Minor} or {Prelude, Op. 3, No. 2} (prompt on “The Bells of
Moscow” early) A frenzied four note chromatic descent from E serves as
a theme in its heavy middle section, under the tempo direction
Agitato. The Larghetto movement from Adolf Henselt’s Piano Concerto in
F Minor is sometimes cited as a basis for this work, preceded by an
Elegy in E Minor as the second of its composer’s five Fantasy Pieces.
Completed when the composer was 19, this somber piece, sometimes
nicknamed “The Bells of Moscow,” later earned its composer’s ire for
becoming frequently demanded as an encore in his piano recitals, and
for overshadowing his other works like his Correlli Variations. FTP,
name this memorable Sergei Rachmaninov prelude. Max {von Sydow} He
made his directing debut with an adaptation of Herman Bang’s novel, By
the Roadside, but decided to stick to acting, playing ex-Nazi Joe
Mueller the next year in the Australian film, Father. It was not until
he played Lassefar in 1987’s Pelle the Conqueror that he won his
country’s Guldbagge Award for acting, but he did have a legacy there
that began nearly four decades ago with his early roles in Only a
Mother and a production of Miss Julie. Though he turned down the title
role for Dr. No, only to be cast in a later Bond film as Blofeld, he
was persuaded to move to Hollywood to play Jesus in The Greatest Story
Ever Told and would go on to star as Father Merrin in The Exorcist.
FTP, name this Swedish actor who often worked under Ingmar Bergman and
starred as the knight in The Seventh Seal. The {Jolly Toper} or The
{Merry Toper} or The {Jolly Drinker} or The {Merry Drinker} One
version features a table with a decorative dish on it in the lower
left corner, with the subject being a rosy-cheeked man wearing a black
cap with a large red feather hanging down from it and holding out an
empty silver tankard. Another portrait with this name shows a bearded
man in yellow with a white lace collar and a black hat clutching a
glass in his left fist. Both were thought to be by the same artist
until a cleaning of the first one revealed a monogram with a five
point star and the initials JL, indicating it to be a work done by the
female pupil of the second painting’s artist. FTP, Judith Leyster and
Franz Hals each produced a portrait with this title, both depicting a
smiling drunk. {Pope Marcellus} Mass or Missa {Papae Marcelli}. Its
dedication letter contains the words “novo modorum genere,” its
composer’s declaration that he was seeking to create a new way of
celebrating the holiest of sacrifices. For the last movement, the
composer rescored the choir to add in a treble and a countertenor in
place of a tenor, and used the form of a canon to create a second
Agnus Dei. A key purpose of this six voice piece was to show that the
words of the mass could remain intelligible even with the use of
polyphony, and it was presented to the Council of Trent. FTP, name
this landmark Giovanni Palestrina mass dedicated to a deceased pope. I
{Puritani} di Scozia or The {Puritans} This opera’s lead female
character appears in a wedding dress as she sings “Son Vergin
Vezzosa;” her father expresses worry for her in the bass aria “Cinta
di Fiori,” and she later enters in a frenzy singing the soprano aria
“Qui la Voce Sua Soave” after Sir Bruno and the men of the fortress
leave. A trick that allows Queen Henrietta Maria to be freed from
Plymouth fools Sir Richard Forth, is carried out by Anthony Talbot,
and is the source of temporary insanity for the lead female, Elvira
Walton. FTP, name this Vincenzo Bellini opera in which Elvira,
daughter of an Oliver Cromwell supporter, is united with Talbot, her
Cavalier lover. The {Temptation of St. Anthony} A winged white figure
floats in the very distant lower center, just above a cloaked figure
holding a cross towards the dark figure lurching towards him. In the
upper right corner, a distant building and a long, narrow tower break
through the heavy clouds in the sky; the base of the tower is affixed
to a saddle. A gold building with an opening showing a naked female
torso is one of a group of riding atop a group of elephants and horse
with nightmarishly exaggerated tall, skinny legs in a procession
moving towards the cross-bearing title figure in, FTP, what Salvador
Dali painting showing a saint being enticed? La {Marseillaise} or The
{Departure of the Volunteers} On the lower right front, a nude man
wearing a cap and holding a sword looks up and left at his commander,
a bearded man in classical armor raising his right arm to the sky. In
total, six Gallic soldiers occupy the lower half of this relief; above
them a winged female warrior in a Phrygian cap extends her sword out
to the right and rallies them, symbolizing the call of Liberty. Along
with two reliefs on the opposite facing side by Antoine Etex and
across from Jean-Pierre Cortot’s Triumph of Napoleon, it adorns one of
the pillars of a Jean Chalgrin monument positioned atop the Champs-
Elysses. FTP, identify this stone relief sculpted for the Arc de
Triomphe by Francois Rude, whose popular nickname has the same title
as the French national anthem. Glenn {Miller} Out of high school, he
signed his first musical contract with the “Senterpeeds,” a Dixieland
band fronted by Boyd Senter. He first recorded under his own name
while working with the Ray Noble Band, and went on to appear in two
Hollywood films, Orchestra Wives, where he introduced his hit take on
“Kalamazoo,” and Sun Valley Serenade, where he played “Chattanooga
Choo Choo.” Also responsible for the hits “Pennsylvania 6-5000” and
“String of Pearls,” this is, FTP, what trombonist and bandleader who
produced “Tuxedo Junction” and “Moonlight Serenade” and vanished in a
mysterious World War II plane flight. Ernest {Bloch} Samuel Laderman
was the dedicatee of one of his last orchestral works, a trumpet piece
entitled Proclamation. He rose to prominence with his set of two tone
poems, Winter-Spring, and the Symphony in C Sharp Minor, then
emigrated to the U.S. after conducting the American premiere of his
Trois Poemes Juifs. His flirtation with baroque music and
neoclassicism is exhibited by his two concerti grossi, composed nearly
thirty years apart, but this teacher of Roger Sessions is best known
for biblically inspired works, like his cello and orchestra piece
titled after the Hebrew name for the book of Solomon, Schelomo. FTP,
name this Swiss-born 20th Century Jewish composer of the Israel
Symphony. {Daphnis et Chloe} or {Daphnis and Chloe} A pair of dances
contrasted as grotesque and gracious successively follows a dance in
this work’s first scene where the protagonist and his rival compete
for a kiss from the lead female. Its early performances were hampered
by arguments over the choreographer’s desire to drop the wordless
chorus accompaniment and the dancers’ trouble with the 5/4 meter of
its closing “Danse Generale.” The composer had more success taking six
dances from its three tableaux’s for a pair of orchestral suites, the
second of which contains “Pantomime” and “Daybreak” movements. A
reenactment of the story of Pan and Syrinx and the female title
character’s capture by pirates advance the plot of, FTP, what ballet
derived from a Longus story about the two titular pastoral lovers, the
music for which was composed by Maurice Ravel? {Kindred Spirits} The
left of the two men in this painting is shown with his hat removed and
placed atop his cane, perhaps as a gesture of reverence to the man
beside him, for whom this work is a memorial. The man on the right,
with his hat still on, holds a sketchbook under his shoulder and
directs his pointing stick towards the two birds flying near the high
cliff across the ravine. Key landscape features include a trio of
overhanging beech tries that frame the scene, a distant waterfall that
flows into a shallow brook, and the rock outcropping on which the two
men, William Cullen Bryant and Thomas Cole, stand. FTP, identify this
painting by Asher Durand. (Johannes) {Brahms’ }{Symphony No. 1 in C
Minor} The violin solo, joined by solo oboe and horn passages, that
closes this work’s Andante Sostenuto second movement, marks the only
time its composer ever set aside a solo specifically for the
concertmaster. Meanwhile, following the dramatic Adagio introduction
of the finale, an Allegro Non Troppo Ma Con Brio tempo brings in a
switch into this work’s parallel key of C major, features a horn solo
that was modeled after the sound of an alpenhorn. Later followed by
the composer’s three other works of the same form in D Major, F Major,
and E Minor, this piece contains a theme with an uncanny resemblance
to the “Ode to Joy,” one of many reasons critics nicknamed it
“Beethoven’s Tenth.” FTP, name this debut symphony by the composer of
the Academic Festival Overture. The {Expulsion} from Paradise (accept
any answer that mentions “Expulsion” and anything related to Adam and
Eve or paradise/Garden of Eden) A recent restoration of this painting
removed images of fig leaves that had been added in the 1670’s to
conceal the nudity of the central character. The female character
assumes the pose of the Venus Pudica by cupping one hand over her
breasts and the other over her groin, and raises her head back in a
despair-ridden expression. The male character buries his head in his
hands, while a sword-wielding angel in red hovers over them and
gestures for them to leave through the archway on the left. FTP, name
this Masaccio fresco depicting Adam and Eve being thrown out of Eden.
{Monument to the Third International} Its bottom story was intended to
host assemblies for the legislature, while its middle section would
house executive bodies, and its uppermost section would hold the
offices of media officials and distributors of propaganda. These
sections were designed to rotate simultaneously at different calendar
intervals, and would respectively take the shape of a cube, a pyramid,
and a cylinder, all of which would be wrapped in a towering spiral of
iron beams. Only produced in a 1919 miniature model, this is, FTP,
what planned structure designed to pay homage to Lenin and the
Bolshevik Revolution, a Constructivist work by Vladimir Tatlin?
{Faust} or Doctor {Faust}us (The first opera mentioned is Petit Faust
by d’Herve, the second is Doktor Faust, the third is Mefistofele, and
the last is Gounod’s Faust) A diminutively titled 1869 parody on this
story is the best known operetta of Florimond Ronger, who composed
under a one word pseudonym. Of the two most well-known adaptations by
Italian composers, one begins with a symphonia and the chorus “Pax,
Pax, Pax;” the other contains the arias “L’altra Notte in Fondo al
Mare” and “Dai Campi, Dai Prati,” and is peculiarly titled after the
central character’s mysterious companion instead. Those operas,
respectively by Ferruccio Busoni and Arrigo Boito, still lack the
popularity of the seminal French opera on this story, which features
“Ah! Je Ris,” or the “Jewel Song,” an aria for Marguerite. FTP, give
the common protagonist of these operas, a doctor who sells his soul to
Mephistopheles and whose story was told by Marlowe and Goethe.
{Danube} School The origins of this movement can be seen in a trio of
altarpieces, two of which are located Zwettl and Melk, painted over a
two year travel period. Along with a man who painted a cycle of the
life St. Leopold, Frueauf the Younger, the artist of those
altarpieces, Jorg Breau, is considered a formative member. Another
leading figure was a court painter at Passau named Wolf Huber, but the
master of this landscape-pioneering school was a man from Regensburg
who painted an enormous sky scene with a dueling crescent moon and sun
and a hovering banner above a panoramic rendition of a military
victory over Darius. FTP, Albrecht Altdorfer led what school of German
Renaissance painting, named for a “beautiful, blue” river? {Rodeo} The
second movement of its spin-off orchestral suite is a nocturne
highlighting the protagonist’s loneliness as she is ignored by
potential suitors, who are waiting for the city girls to arrive. At
first she is alone during the “Saturday Night Waltz,” but after
leaving briefly to put on a dress and ribbons, she upstages the
daughter of Burnt Ranch’s owner by winning the attention of her beau.
However, during the closing barn dance that quotes the folk tunes
“Bonaparte’s Retreat” and “McLeod’s Reel,” she takes the Champion
Roper as her partner instead. FTP, name this Aaron Copland ballet
remembered for its “Hoedown.” Abbey of {St. Denis} A line of verse
describing how “the dull mind can be elevated to the truth through
material things” was inscribed on its lavish gilded entry doors. The
gold decorating them was intended to invoke the image of the holy
light of Christ, as were the scenes such as that of the tree of Jesse
that were rendered for its stained glass windows. Once host to a
bright red banner called the oriflamme, it was originally built by
Dagobert I, a Merovingian king who would be buried in its basilica,
but came to artistic prominence through a 12th Century rebuilding
project that was described in its overseer’s journal, De
Administratione, and turned it into one of the first ornate Gothic
cathedrals. FTP, identify this Benedictine monastery named for a
French patron saint and once led by Abbot Suger. Pablo Picasso’s {Rose
Period} The transition into it can be seen in the artist’s portrait of
a mistress named Madeleine, who gives off an aura of grace and beauty
in her soft-toned camise, despite posing against an atypically dark
background. At its height, it resulted in a portrait of a bonneted
woman carrying bread on her head, Woman with Loaves, and one of a
seductively posed youth in blue wearing a flower garland around his
head and visibly intoxicated from opium, Boy with a Pipe. A painting
of a group of acrobats posing with an ape fits the most common theme
of this period, street and circus performers, such as the Family of
Saltimbanques. FTP, identify this brief artistic period that followed
Picasso’s Blue Period and took its name from his heavy use of the
eponymous flowery pink color. {Putto} with {Dolphin} or {Boy} with
{Dolphin} Designed as a centerpiece for the courtyard of the Villa at
Careggi, this statue, now located at the Palazzo Vecchio, places the
title figure in contrapposto form and has him posed in an arabesque
with his right leg kicked back as he stands on a plain bronze
hemisphere. His curly-haired head looks down, his wings stand out
erectly, and his hands grasp the titular creature, whose snout was
designed as the spout for a fountain. FTP, name this Andrea del
Verrocchio sculpture of the titular child and aquatic mammal. {Z}
Maurice Baquet plays the Bald Man, Jean-Francois Gobbi is Jimmy the
Boxer, and Marcel Bozzuffi and Renato Salvatori are Vago and Yago, a
pair of thugs who attack a main character from a delivery truck.
Prefaced by a sardonic French disclaimer asserting that any
resemblance to real life people or events is intentional, this film
opens with a shady government meeting in which officials use the
metaphor of “ideological mildew” to describe their political
opposition. Yves Montand stars as the Deputy, who is murdered as the
result of a right wing conspiracy in this 1969 film, which was shot in
Algeria and based on the assassination of Gregoris Lambrakis, a Greek
politician. FTP, identify this Costa Gavras film, for which an
expression meaning “he is alive” is the source of its single letter
title. {fountain}s An 1826 Camille Corot painting set in Rome shows a
man in red on the right dwarfed by the one outside the French Academy.
John Singer Sargent painted one at the Villa Torlonia, the vase shaped
one at the Rockefeller estate in Pocantico, and a marble one at
Aranjuez in Spain. A Jan van Eyck painting depicts a tall one standing
to the left of a blue-robed, standing Madonna. The Getty Museum houses
paintings by both Boucher and Fragonard showing a young couple
frolicking outside nearby one “of love,” while an irreverent self-
portrait shows a shirtless Bruce Nauman imitating one by spitting a
stream of water at the camera. FTP, identify this common object, which
also served as the title for Marcel Duchamp’s “readymade” urinal. Mily
{Balakirev} Alfredo Casella and Sergei Lyapunov, the latter of whom
also completed this man’s Piano Concerto no. 2 in E Flat Major after
his death, each orchestrated his masterwork: a fantasy on three folk
themes, the titular one being a Kabardian dance; the piece was so
difficult that he himself could not play it. He wrote a four movement
suite named for Chopin, as well as the symphonic poem In Bohemia, an
Overture on a Spanish March Theme, and incidental music for King Lear.
A founder of the Free School of Music, he championed the work of
Glinka in his efforts to give his nation a musical identity, which he
achieved by recruiting men like Cui and Mussorgsky. FTP, name this
composer of Islamey and leader of the Russian Five. {A Village Romeo
and Juliet} Scene IV reveals that the lead female’s father has
suffered severe head trauma after being struck by her lover, the male
lead, and the two imagine themselves being married at the old church
of Seldwyla in a dream sequence. In the end, the music of the Dark
Fiddler plays as the two lovers find their marriage bed on a hay barge
floating down the river, which they decide to sink deliberately. That
final scene, in which Vrenchen and Sali commit suicide, is preceded by
this opera’s oft-performed orchestral interlude, “The Walk to the
Paradise Garden.” FTP, name this Frederick Delius opera, which,
despite its title, does not contain any Montagues or Capulets. Jan
{Steen} One of his rare religious paintings was actually modeled after
an Abraham Koninck play and uses red theater curtains to frame the
scene of a Philistine mob encircling and taunting a bound Samson. He
satired such professions as educators, showing a teacher sharpening a
pencil oblivious to the chaotic behavior of his children in The
Village School, and physicians, showing a crowd gather around a
painful dental extraction in The Quack Doctor. Games of cards or
skittles were also popular subjects for this student of Nicholas
Knupfer, who painted himself as a lute player and drew from his day
job as an innkeeper to paint such scenes as The Dancing Couple and
Rhetoricians at a Window, as well as numerous works showing a family
on Christmas Eve. FTP, name this Dutch Baroque genre painter, artist
of The Feast of St. Nicholas. The {Treatise on Harmony} (accept
{Traite de l’Harmonie}) An English work of the same title outlined the
basics of working in two, three, or four parts and attempted to revise
the methods advocated by Christopher Simpson and John Playfeld. That
version, written by the composer of The Beggar’s Opera, Johann
Christoph Pepusch, came eight years after the publication of the more
famous and lengthy version, whose preface heavily cited the influence
of Gioseffe Zarlino. Of the four books of this 1722 work, one is
entitled “Principles of Composition,” and another “On the Nature and
Properties of Chords.” FTP, identify this treatise on musical theory
by Jean- Philippe Rameau. Albert {Speer} He is survived by a son of
the same name, who headed projects to modernize the city of Tianjin
and construct a sixteen mile road for use in Beijing’s 2008 Olympics
hosting. His affinity for classical styling and the use of stone over
iron and other metals can be traced to his theory of “ruin value,” in
which buildings are designed to leave behind magnificent ruins after
falling into disrepair. The rival of Hermann Giesler, he created a
“cathedral of ice” with his massive array of vertical spotlights for a
political rally, but never got a chance to execute his epic scale
designs for the remodeling of Berlin. FTP, name this man who was later
sentenced to twenty years in prison by the Nuremberg trials, the
personal architect of Hitler. {Zigeunerweisen} or {Gypsy Airs} or
{Gypsy Songs} It begins with a two and a half measure orchestral
flourish, before the solo violin enters with an open G and begins the
introductory Moderato section in C minor, which ends with a fast 64th
note rising arpeggio and a plucked G chord. The bulk of its roughly 8
minute length comes from the second of its four sections, a Lento,
though this perennial favorite of Jascha Heifetz reaches its peak with
its mournful Un Poco Piu Lento third section, and the extraordinarily
fast and high-pitched Allegro Molto Vivace finale that closes this
virtuoso violin work. FTP, name this gypsy-themed violin and orchestra
piece by Pablo de Sarasate. The {Morning Bell} (accept “The {Old
Mill}”) A brown and white spotted dog can be seen bending down at the
trunk of a tree on the left side of this painting, although the tree’s
base extends far below the platform on which the dog stands.
Meanwhile, a trio of girls chats in a circle amidst a pile of rocks on
the right. A row of wooden planks serves as a set of stairs leading to
a narrow wooden ramp over a ditch with a flimsy rail on its left side,
leading to the wooden house in the background. A girl in a red dress
and white hat stands on the ramp, facing the building with uncertainty
as she prepares to walk to her job at the Lowell mill. FTP, identify
this Winslow Homer painting in which the ringing of the titular object
might mark the beginning of the work day. Charles Loius Ambroise
{Thomas} Before taking Gasparo Spontini’s place on the Academie des
Beaux Arts, this man won a Prix de Rome for the cantata Hermann et
Ketty and had success with a satire on Rossini’s The Italian Girl in
Algiers, entitled Le Caid. The successor of Daniel Auber as director
of the Paris Conservatory and teacher of Jules Massenet, he produced a
pair of oft-performed operas: one contains the aria “Connais-tu Le
Pays” and a famous gavotte and is based on Goethe’s Wilhelm Meister’s
Apprenticeship, the other is an adaptation of a Shakespearean revenge
tragedy set at Elsinore. FTP, name this French composer of the operas
Mignon and Hamlet. La {Disputa} or {Disputation} Over the Sacrament
(accept “Dispute”) In this fresco, a gold-toned canopy decorated with
angels surrounds the white-bearded personification of God, holding a
globe and wearing a green robe as he leans atop a throne in the clouds
on which Jesus sits, flanked by Mary on the left and John on the
right. In the earthly section, Ambrose and Augustine on the left and
Jerome and Gregory the Great, who bears the features of Julius II, on
the right, sit around a central altar depicting the Eucharist. The
painter added images of contemporaries like Sixtus IV, a laurel-
crowned Dante, and Donato Bramante, who also appears in the
classically-themed fresco facing it on the opposite wall of the Stanza
della Segnatura, The School of Athens. FTP, name this Raphael fresco
whose title does not necessarily refer to an argument over a religious
rite. “{Take the A Train}” (Welk introduced it as “Take a Train”)
Lawrence Welk became the subject of an oft-told anecdote by omitting a
word from its title while introducing this piece on his show. The four
bar piano passage that opens it has alternately been interpreted as a
whole tone or Lydian dominant scale, and contains a noteworthy D7b5
chord, which leads to the saxophones playing the main melody with
accompaniment from muted trumpets and trombones. In lyrics that were
memorably sang by Ella Fitzgerald, the singer exclaims that the title
object is coming and the “rails [are] a-humming,” and that it is the
quickest way to Sugar Hill. Billy Strayhorn wrote the lyrics for, FTP,
what Duke Ellington hit, which instructs listeners to get on the
titular Harlem subway line? {string quartets} by Franz Joseph {Haydn}
(prompt on a partial answer) The last two completed ones were
dedicated to Prince Lobkowitz, while the Opus 71 and 74 series were
written for Anton Apponyi, and include “The Rider” in G minor. The
composer’s decision to replace the standard minuet movement in his
Opus 33 series resulted in their being nicknamed “Gli Scherzi,” though
that series is also called the “Jungfern” series and the “Russian”
series. Anthony van Hoboken catalogued 83 of these works; under that
system, number 38 denotes “The Joke,” while number 39 refers to “The
Bird.” FTP, “The Lark” is another example of what type of chamber
piece a prolific Austrian classical composer wrote for two violins,
viola, and cello? George {Washington} An 1841 sculpture of this man
showed him sitting bare-chested in a throne, holding out a sword with
his left hand, lifting his right arm, and pointing a finger towards
the sky. This statue of him sought to imitate the Statue of Zeus, but
instead garnered intense criticism for its creator, Horatio Greenough.
A more well-received homage to him shows him standing in a three piece
suit with a cane in his right hand, but also includes the classical
image of a thirteen-rod fasces that he leans on with his left hand.
FTP, Jean Houdon sculpted what American general and first president of
the United States? {Kinderscenen} or {Scenes from Childhood} The fast
melody of alternately ascending and descending three note passages in
its ninth movement imitate the motion of a rocking horse. “Almost Too
Serious” and “Frightened” are two of the movements that follow before
this set closes with movement thirteen’s reflexive postlude, “The Poet
Speaks.” It opens with the awestruck-sounding “Of Foreign Lands and
Peoples,” and Vladimir Horowitz made a stand-alone encore staple of
its seventh movement, a dreamy piece more popularly known by its
German name, “Traumerei.” FTP, this set of short piano pieces Robert
Schumann composed to reminisce about his youth. The {Apotheosis of
Homer} The artist’s homage to classical music is done through of a
profile of Gluck and a head shot of Mozart, which appear on the lower
right and lower left, respectively. Renaissance poetry is represented
by the presence of Tasso and Camoes, while a scroll-holding Sophocles
and a lyre-holding Pindar are among the representatives of classical
literature. The artist also painted some of his countrymen, like
Boileau, Poussin, and Racine, in the foreground, and used the women in
green and red sitting under the central throne to symbolize the
Odyssey and Iliad. FTP, name this Jean Ingres painting showing a blind
Greek poet being crowned as a god. The {Parthenon} Giovanni Lusieri
was charged with sketching this structure’s features and supervised
the dismantling of its metopes as part of a turn of the 19th Century
project. The last images of it in its intact form come from the 1674
drawings of Jacques Carrey, taken over a decade before a skirmish
between the Venetians and the Ottomans, who were using it for
ammunition storage, caused its roof to collapse. Friezes of scenes
such as the battle of the Lapiths and Centaurs and of a contest
involving Poseidon and an olive tree rank among its sculpture work,
much of which was taken for the collection of Thomas Bruce, an English
earl. FTP, Ictinus and Callicrates led the construction of what temple
on the Acropolis dedicated to Athena? {Midnight Cowboy} Early on, the
protagonist directly faces the camera while standing at a mirror in
his motel room and rehearsing his plans to tell his manager at the
cafeteria to shove it. As he begins his new life, the protagonist gets
fleeced out of $20 after a sexual encounter with Cass Treehun
initiated by his asking for directions to the Statue of Liberty as a
pickup line. Another scammer leads the protagonist to a creepy
religious zealot named O’Daniel, but later becomes his mentor about
life as a grifter on the streets of New York. Dustin Hoffman plays
“Ratso” Rizzo in, FTP, what film about Texan Joe Buck’s naive attempt
to become a big city gigolo, the only Best Picture Oscar winner to be
rated X? John Everett {Millais} The viewer is positioned as the role
of the fourth player in his painting of three well-dressed ladies
playing a parlor card game, Hearts are Trumps. Two nuns can be seen
digging a grave at sunset in his far more somber scene, The Vale of
Rest. His favorite model and future wife can be seen wrapped in blue
and brown blankets, holding a child, and embracing a man in a Tartan
kilt in his take on the Jacobite Rebellion, The Order of Release. A
magnet for controversy, he was subjected to scathing criticism from
Charles Dickens for his Christ in the House of the Carpenters, and
attracted infamy by marrying Effie Gray, the ex-wife of John Ruskin,
and by making his model Elizabeth Siddal lie in a freezing bathtub to
pose for his masterpiece. FTP, name this Pre-Raphaelite painter of
Ophelia. {Egmont} Overture The lyrical string theme that appears after
a transition from its opening to a 3/4 time Allegro section in sonata
form highlights the indelible spirit of the title character. A dismal
mood is initially set by the brooding sarabande in 3/2 time that
follows the dramatic, fermata-held opening F minor chord, and
represents the foreign oppressors who will later torture and kill the
title character; however, the triumphant ending of the play it was
written for is foreshadowed by the closing shift to an F major
“Victory Symphony.” The rarely performed set of incidental music
following it is remembered primarily for two lieder sang by the title
character’s girlfriend, Klarchen. FTP, identify this Ludwig Beethoven
overture about a Dutch prince who opposed the Duke of Alba and became
the namesake of a Goethe play. {Trajan’s Column} At the orders of
Sixtus V, the top of this structure was crowned in 1588 by a statue of
St. Peter, replacing a nude sculpture of its namesake said to have
originally stood there. A square balcony surrounds its top section,
while its base was built to house the ashes of its namesake and his
wife, Plotina. The crossing of the Danube and the conquest of
Sarmizegethusa are depicted on the reliefs that spiral up and surround
the surface of this structure, telling a narrative of the campaign
against the Dacians. FTP, identify this Roman pillar dedicated to the
emperor that succeeded Nerva. {Thais} The title character sings a
sensual duet while having her feet washed in “Baigne d’eau tes mains”
and frets over the possible loss of her beauty in “Dis-Moi Que Je Suis
Belle.” Perhaps the most demanding role in this opera is the
coloratura La Charmeuse, a ballet dancer and accessory role to Crobyle
and Myrtale, the slave-girls of the title character’s lover Nicias.
Following the story of the zealous monk Athanael, who both wants to
love and save the soul of the titular courtesan, this opera is most
popularly remembered for Act II’s slow “Meditation” section. Based on
an Anatole France novel, this is, FTP, what 1894 opera by Jules
Massenet? {Reclining Figure}s A 1939 elm-wood one is held by the
Detroit Institute of Arts, while the Art Gallery of Ontario owns one
of the six “Three Piece” ones known as “Bridge Props.” The artist
produced several “Draped” versions and used materials ranging from
plaster to bronze to Hornton stone to craft these abstract pieces,
which were inspired by his study of Mayan Chacmool figures. The
Lincoln Center and the UNESCO building house open-air examples of,
FTP, what signature theme of sedentary statue forms designed by Henry
Moore? {Marie de Medici} Apollo plays a viola da gamba in the left,
the three nude Graces offer this woman a flower of beauty, and Athena
holds a book in front of her in the painting depicting her
“Education.” Another scene shows her holding a classical statue and
wearing an ornate war helmet as she is portrayed as the goddess
Bellona. She does not appear in the first painting of her cycle, which
shows Jupiter and Juno watching the Fates spin her destiny, but she is
shown in her series’ final painting, The Triumph of Truth, holding out
a wreath of reconciliation to Louis XIII. In perhaps the most
memorable of the paintings, Neptune and a group of the artist’s
characteristically fleshy sea nymphs guide her boat as she makes her
landing at Marseilles. FTP, name this Italian-born French queen, the
subject of an extravagant cycle of paintings by Peter Paul Rubens.
Hans Werner {Henze} His first major opera after emigrating to Italy
was an adaptation of Carlo Gozzi’s The King Stag translated into his
native language. A periodic affinity for leftist politics saw him
compose the Essay of Pigs and write an oratorio called The Raft of the
Medusa in memory of Che Guevara, but his most successful work came in
preceding years with his score for a Frederick Ashton ballet about a
mermaid, Ondine, and his collaborations with Chester Kallman and W.H.
Auden that produced the Elegy for Young Lovers and an operatic
retelling of a Euripides play about the demise of King Pentheus. FTP,
identify this still-living German opera composer of The Bassarids.
{Romantic} Symphony The one written in 1931 has only three movements,
with an Andante con Tenerezza as its second and an Adagio to Allegro
Moderato transition as its first. Along with Stravinsky’s Symphony of
Psalms and other works, it was composed to celebrate the 50th
anniversary of the Boston Symphony, eight years after its creator
finished his earlier Nordic Symphony. Another symphony with this name
is primarily in E flat major, has three movements with a tempo
direction of “not too fast” to accommodate the composer’s desire for a
grand buildup of the theme, and had its third movement scherzo and
fourth movement finale rewritten before its 1881 premiere in Vienna.
FTP, Howard Hanson’s second and Anton Bruckner’s fourth symphonies
share as a nickname what adjective, which also refers to a wide-
ranging 19th Century artistic and musical movement emphasizing
emotions and an attachment to nature? “{Woman}” or “{Women}” The third
member of this series was traded to Arthur Houghton III in exchange
for a manuscript of the Shah-nemah by the Iranian government. A layer
of blue color at the bottom of the fourth one resembles water,
creating the impression that the central figure is standing in a river
as she raises her yellow and red dress. The first of the six numbered
ones stands nearly seven feet high, and shocked viewers in its 1953
debut with its depiction of a bug- eyed figure with a sneering grin
and monstrous breasts. A simultaneously produced male counterpart
series by the artist’s wife, Elaine, failed to match the success of,
FTP, what series of bizarre abstract paintings of females by Willem de
Kooning? {Bitches Brew} A 1998 release of the complete recordings
behind this album introduced nine previously unreleased tracks, such
as “Take It or Leave It,” “Yaphet,” and an additional version of
“Double Image.” Participants in its productions included bassist Dave
Holland, bass clarinetist Bennie Maupin, and guitarist John
McLaughlin, the namesake of its fourth track. This album, which also
included such cuts as “Pharoah’s Dance” and “Spanish Key,” is, along
with its artist’s In a Silent Way, often labeled the defining album of
jazz fusion. FTP, name this 1969 Miles Davis double album released ten
years after Kind of Blue. Aristide {Maillol} He sculpted a scene of a
kneeling man lunging to suck a woman’s breast in his terracotta
relief, Desire, and used bronze to depict a prone woman gliding on a
base with her legs and arms out horizontally in 1939’s The Air. His
first major sculptural success came at age 45 with his rendition of a
naked woman with her hands bound behind her back, a monument to Louis-
Auguste Blanqui entitled Action in Chains. Beginning his art career as
a Symbolist and Nabis painter in the style of Gauguin, this is, FTP,
what French-Catalan sculptor of classical female nudes, such as his
bronze stature of a crouching woman, The Mediterranean? {Gilles} or
{Pierrot} (don’t accept “Gilles and His Family,” because everything
before the FTP refers to a different painting) In the most studied
portrait of him, the profile of a stone statue peeks through
underneath a tree on the right edge, and further below it, the torsos
of three figures, including a man in a red costume with a puffy hat,
seem to emerge from the ground. To his lower left a bush is
superimposed by the image of a smiling man riding his donkey. He
himself stands rigidly straight with a solemn expression on his face,
forming a contrast with his frilly lace collar, floppy hat, and pink-
tasseled shoes. FTP, identify this French clown, who was shown playing
the lute with his family in another painting, also done by Jean-
Antoine Watteau. Paganini’s {Caprice} No. {24} in A Minor (prompt on
any mention of Paganini’s Caprices that doesn’t specifically refer to
the individual 24th caprice) A high-pitched chromatic sixteenth note
passage comprises its theme’s fourth variation, while its third
consists entirely of eighth note double stops, all at an octave
interval. The introductory theme and its variations are all in 2/4
time, and with the exception of the eleventh and last variation,
twelve measures long. A flurry of rising and falling sixteenth note
arpeggios and an abrupt shift to A major from the main key of A minor
marks the ending of this challenging solo violin piece, which was
merged with a Dies Irae theme in a rhapsody by Rachmaninoff. FTP, name
this last of a series of two dozen violin pieces by Paganini. Ernst
Ludwig {Kirchner} His interest in the poetry of Adelbert von Chamisso
inspired a set of illustrations based on the romance Peter Schlemihl.
During this time, he also painted several murals for the Konigstein
Sanatorium, where he was institutionalized. He painted himself smoking
a cigarette and having a severed hand in his 1915 Self Portrait as a
Soldier, a reminder of how his World War I service traumatized him. A
Fauvist-inspired use of color and a penchant for primitivism are
reflected both in his Girl under a Japanese Parasol and in the work of
his colleagues Fritz Bleyl, Karl Schmidt-Rottluff, and Erich Heckel.
FTP, identify this German artist and leading member of Die Brucke.
{Couperin} (Francois’ uncle Louis was the composer referred to in the
leadin) One had his organ works collected in a manuscript named for
Guy Oldham and wrote a piece in memory of the lute player Blancrocher.
Their roots can be traced to a vineyard owner named Mathurin, whose
descendents, such as Nicholas and Armand-Louis, had a hold over the
position of organist at Saint Gervais. The most successful member
wrote a book called The Art of Playing the Keyboard, composed pieces
imagining the apotheosis of his contemporaries Corelli and Lully, and
was memorialized in a “Tomb” suite by Maurice Ravel. FTP, name this
family of French Baroque composers that included Francois “le Grand.”
The {Last Judgment} (prompt on an early buzz of “Arena Chapel” or
“Scrovegni Chapel”) On each side at the extreme top of this piece, an
angel can be seen stripping away the sky. At the very center of this
fresco, beneath an arch, is a glowing mandorla surrounded by angels,
encasing a seated Christ and emitting a burning red streak that
threads down to the lower right scene. At the bottom center, beneath a
large cross, the donor can be seeing kneeling before Gabriel and two
figures of Mary as he presents them with a model of a building. That
man is Enrico Scrovegni, and the building is the Arena Chapel, where
this fresco covers the entire west wall. FTP, name this Giotto fresco
showing earth, Heaven, and Hell on the day of reckoning, a scene that
was also the subject of Michelangelo’s final painting at the Sistine
Chapel. A {Life for the Tsar} or {Zhizn za Tsarya} (accept “Ivan
Susanin” until it is mentioned) The impoverished bass protagonist of
this opera is also the title character of an earlier 1815 opera by
Catterino Cavos. Popular independently performed pieces from it
include Act II’s mazurka and krakowiak, which are played during the
scene of a Polish ball. The planned marriage of Antonida and Sobinin
is overshadowed by political intrigues that end with Mikhail
successfully escaping his would-be assassins due to a diversion the
protagonist sets for the occupying Polish army. FTP, identify this
opera in which Ivan Susanin sacrifices himself so Michael Romanov can
gain the crown, a work by Mikhail Glinka. {Tempietto} de San Pietro in
Montorio It was intended to be the centerpiece of a circular courtyard
that was never built, and the 15 foot diameter of its inner cella
makes it unusable as any sort of assembly place. Its walkway is a
concentric ring of three steps, surrounded the sixteen Doric columns
that support its first floor’s Tuscan colonnade, while a small balcony
surrounds the outside portion of its second floor, constructed as a
smaller concentric circle, and topped by a dome with a cross adorning
its center. Built on the Janiculum, atop the alleged crucifixion site
of St. Peter, this is, FTP, what “little temple” at San Pietro in
Montorio, designed by Donato Bramante? Georges {Bizet} Gallet and Blau
wrote the libretti for his abandoned operas The Cup of the King of
Thule and Don Rodrigue, and this composer also left behind an
unfinished opera about Ivan the Terrible. In the year his Doctor
Miracle premiered, he won the Prix de Rome, and two years later
completed his experiment in opera buffa, Don Procopio. Djamileh and
The Fair Maid of Perth are other noteworthy operas by this man, whose
masterpiece features the characters Zuniga, Escamillo, and Don Jose.
FTP, name this French composer of Carmen. {Laurentian Library} or
{Laurentine Library} or La {Biblioteca} Mediceo-{Laurenziana} (accept
any answer that mentions “library” and “San Lorenzo” as well) A
patterned red terracotta floor, stained glass windows designed by
Francesco Salviati, and a ceiling of wood matching its rows of benches
and desks comprise the nearly 170 foot long rectangular hall that
forms its reading room. The difficulty of constructing it within the
confines of an existing monastic building may explain the existence of
such bizarre features as Tuscan columns that act as wall decorations
rather than supports, and doors and windows that lead to boarded up
stone niches in the walls. Its crowning feature, described as a vision
from a dream in the designer’s letter to Vasari, is an approach
consisting of an elliptical pietra serena staircase in Mannerist
style, spawning two additional rectangular side stairways at its
center and sculpted by Bartolomeo Ammannati after the designer’s clay
model. FTP, name this late work of Michelangelo at the order of
Clement VII, a famous Florence book depository of the Medicis. {Pavane
for a Dead Princess} or {Pavane pour une Infante Defunte} (Ravel’s
quote was, “I wrote a Pavane for a deceased princess… not a deceased
Pavane for a princess.” Structured as a rondo in A-B-A-C-A form, this
piece has a stirring F major passage labeled “Tres Grave” and a soft D
major section labeled “Very Distant,” or “Tres Lointain,” as its
respective C and B sections. Despite its status as his first popular
success, it was decried by its composer as showing the “excessive
influence of Emmanuel Chabrier” and was the subject of a wry quip
criticizing lifeless performances of it by amateurs. A direction to
play softly, but with a full sound, precedes the main G major theme of
this six minute piano piece in the style of a Renaissance dance, whose
orchestrated version opens with a moving French horn solo. FTP,
identify this Maurice Ravel piece, which, despite its title, was not
written in memory of a deceased child. {Persona} Its opening treats
the viewer with such random images as a spider, a view of a morgue, a
nail being driven through a hand, and an erect penis, the last of
which was removed by American censors. The director deliberately chose
to make the sprocket holes visible in the final copy, and added a meta
aspect to its ending by cutting to a shot of the camera crew itself.
Jorgen Lindstrom and Gunnar Bjornstrand play accessory roles as the
son and husband, but the plot centers on the interplay between the
mute actress Elisabeth Vogler and her nurse Alma, who is sent to serve
as her therapist, but does all the talking herself. FTP, identify this
Ingmar Bergman film in which Elisabeth and Alma gradually seem to swap
identities. David Alfaro {Siqueiros} A reminder of his military career
can be seen in a 1945 self-portrait showing him with his right fist
outstretched towards the viewer and entitled The Great Colonel. His
writing for The Vanguard under Dr. Atl and his co- founding of the
weekly journal Machete were early inklings of his political fervor,
which led to his anti-religious The Devil in the Church and his anti-
fascist The New Democracy. Also remembered for his Echo of a Scream
and a series of pieces chronicling the overthrow of Porfirio Diaz,
this is, FTP, which muralist, whose The March of Humanity can be found
on the wall of a Mexico City hotel? {Christmas} Concerto or {Concerto
Grosso} No. {8} in G Minor (accept just the number after “concerto
grosso” is mentioned) The Grave section of its opening movement has an
unusual 4/2 time signature and is preceded by an introductory seven
measure Vivace passage. Its third movement shifts to E flat major, and
consists of a sixteenth note filled Allegro section placed between two
identical Adagiompassages. The piece switches to its parallel key of G
Major for its sixth and final movement, a “Pastorale ad Libitum,”
designed to evoke images of shepherds and angels in the fields outside
Bethlehem during the approaching nativity. FTP, identify this concerto
grosso composed by Arcangelo Corelli for performance on a winter
holiday. {Carnation, Lilly, Lilly, Rose} Deriving its title from the
refrain of a Joseph Mazzinghi song, this painting was created while
its artist was staying abroad in the Cotswold village of Broadway, and
took the entire fall seasons of 1885-86 to complete because of the
artist’s insistence on painting only at the exact moment of sunset
during short breaks from his tennis game. Scattered orange and red
globes illuminate this quasi-Impressionist scene of young, brown-
haired Polly and Dolly Barnard wearing their frilled white dresses and
standing in the high grass of a dense flower garden as they light up
the Chinese lanterns decorating it. FTP, name this painting with a
four word floral-themed title, a work of John Singer Sargent.
{prepared piano} Among the short pieces written for it are Shimmera,
Totem Ancestor, and the Prelude for Meditation. This instrument was
also the subject of a set of sixteen Sonatas and Interludes, the
fourteenth and fifteenth of which are paired together under the name
“Gemini.” It was created to accompany Sylvilla Fort’s African-themed
Bachannale dance, with its primary composer building off an experiment
by his teacher Henry Cowell and inserting screws, nuts, and bolts
between the strings of a standard instrument to give it an addition
percussive effect. FTP, name this modified piano developed by John
Cage. Marius {Petipa} Nepotism shaped his career, as he made his
performing debut at age 12 in his father’s 1832 Brussels production of
Pierre Gardel’s La Dansomanie. Contributions to La Fleur de Grenade
and La Perle de Seville highlighted his four year stay in Madrid, but
it was during his stay abroad in another country where he had his
first great success, The Pharoah’s Daughter, whose music was written
by Cesare Pugni. The exotic costumes and settings of that work, much
like his revival of Le Corsaire and his La Bayadere, became trademarks
of this man, who spent over four decades with the Imperial Theatre and
worked with Alexander Glazunov on Raymonda. FTP, name this French-
born, St. Petersburg- based choreographer of Swan Lake and The
Sleeping Beauty, often called the father of Russian classical ballet.
Dynamism of a {Dog on a Leash} The outgrowth of an excursion by the
artist to Montepulciano to paint the rose garden of a female student,
this piece was followed by similarly styled depictions of a
violinist’s hand and of a girl on a balcony. Its center is blurred by
a grayish elliptical shape, whose outline is created by the
oscillation of four visible chains. Located in Buffalo’s Albright Knox
Gallery, this painting has a bare, wooden-appearing background that is
only filled by hazy, superimposed black images of the bottom of a
woman’s dress and her feet as she walks, and of the titular pet
scurrying forth on its paws and wagging its tail. FTP, identify this
Giacomo Balla “dynamism” showing a canine being taken for a walk. 10\.
He made connections with future collaborators Jimmy Rushing and Walter
The outgrowth of an excursion by the artist to Montepulciano to paint
the rose garden of a female student, this piece was followed by
similarly styled depictions of a violinist’s hand and of a girl on a
balcony. Its center is blurred by a grayish elliptical shape, whose
outline is created by the oscillation of four visible chains. Located
in Buffalo’s Albright Knox Gallery, this painting has a bare, wooden-
appearing background that is only filled by hazy, superimposed black
images of the bottom of a woman’s dress and her feet as she walks, and
of the titular pet scurrying forth on its paws and wagging its tail.
FTP, identify this Giacomo Balla “dynamism” showing a canine being
taken for a walk. {Polovtsian Dances} The two and a half minute
opening Andantino section, marked by a soft female chorus led by
strings and winds and paced by the rhythmic clang of a triangle, is
later repeated in a subsequent Moderato Alla Breve passage and was the
basis of the Broadway song, “Stranger in Paradise.” A bouncy Allegro
Vivo section simulates the festivities of the Lezghin people and
segues into its famous middle section, where hammering timpani and
bass drums repeatedly build up a rising full chorus melody that
suddenly peaks and falls each time with a rapid, dramatic string
descent. In the opera it was written for, this set of works is
performed at Konchak’s camp by male and female slaves to entertain his
prisoners. Orchestrated by Glazunov and Rimsky-Korsakov, this is, FTP,
what set of barbaric tribal dances from Alexander Borodin’s Prince
Igor? {Noli Me Tangere} (prompt on close English translations) In
Maurice Denis’ take on this theme, the title phrase appears on a
yellow banner waving atop a tree in brightly colored orange grove.
Jesus appears holding a shovel and wearing a farmer’s hat in Lavinia
Fontana’s version, while in Hans Holbein’s version, he stands in an
aloof pose, draped in a red cape, and pushing both hands out in a
standoffish gesture. Correggio’s rendition puts Jesus in a blue toga
and the accompanying woman in a golden dress, but more formulaic
versions by Fra Angelico, Giotto, and Titian show Jesus in white,
looking down and warding off the advances of a kneeling woman in red,
Mary Magdalene. FTP, give the three word Latin title of these
paintings, which reflects Christ’s order not to be touched. Wilhelm
{Lehmbruck} He repaid an art collector named Sally Falk by modeling
two androgynous busts after her for his first solo exhibition. One of
his last non-sculptural works was a set of fourteen drawings based on
Friedrich Holderin poems and dedicated to his favorite model, the
actress Elisabeth Berger. Now the namesake of a museum at Duisburg, he
sculpted Female Torso, also called Daphne, a year before he committed
suicide. His sculpture of a defeated male nude crawling helplessly on
all fours with his head down, The Fallen Man, was an anti-war
commentary, though this contemporary of Kathe Kollwitz and Ernst
Barlach is best known for a work that looks like a stretched-out,
despair- ridden version of Rodin’s Thinker. FTP, name this German
expressionist sculptor of solemn nudes with thin, elongated features,
such as 1917’s Seated Youth. {Andrea Chenier} A main antagonist
remorsefully sings “Nemico della Patria” and reflects on his
zealousness as he writes an accusation against the title character for
the tribunal. The title character begs for his life in “Si, Fui
Soldato” and decries the corruption of the revolution, and his accuser
Gerrard even admits to fabricating the charges in an unsuccessful bid
to save him, having been moved by Maddalena di Coigny’s touching
soprano aria about the loss of a parent, “La Mamma Morta.” FTP, name
this opera that ends with the titular historical poet being
guillotined during the Reign of Terror, the magnum opus of Umberto
Giordano. {self-portrait}s by Albrecht {Durer} The earliest painted
one bears the inscription “My affairs will go on as though ordained
from above,” and shows the subject with a pink-ribboned shirt, a red
cap over his flowing amber hair, and a sprig of sea holly in his hand.
An earlier one drawn by the artist at 13 contains his retroactively
added commentary about how it was done using a mirror. The second
painted one shows a curly haired man sitting next to a window and
wearing a matching black and white striped cap and shirt. Only two
years later, at age 28, the artist painted his most dramatic one,
featuring a brown fur coat, a directly forward facing pose, and
symmetrically arranged shoulder-length brown hair on each side in a
deliberate Christ-like portrayal. FTP, identify these works in which a
German Renaissance woodcutter rendered his own features. Lancelot
“Capability” {Brown} As an independent contractor, he had his first
commission designing the Croome estate for Lord Coventry. Notorious
for the length of time spent on his projects, as Burghley House took
over 25 years and required the construction of an artificial lake, he
often collaborated with the builder Henry Holland. The formative years
of his career were at Stowe in Buckinghamshire, where he modeled his
style after that of William Kent. After being placed in charge of
maintaining Hampton Court Palace, he had his greatest success working
with John Vanbrugh to produce an epic landscape for Blenheim Palace.
FTP, identify this 18th Century English garden designer, whose
nickname came for his penchant for talking about his potential to
improve landscapes. {Ovid among the Scythians} Just to the lower left
of the title character, a boy in an orange tunic pets a black wolf,
and to the right of the title character, a woman and two shield-
bearing men, all wearing red, move close and stare at him. A hilly
seaside landscape with a slightly cloudy sky forms the backdrop of
this scene, whose foreground shows a black mare being milked, alluding
to a practice that was attributed to the titular people by Herodotus.
The title character, clearly out of place with his blue toga on, rests
pensively on the grass, perhaps wistfully remembering his life in Rome
before being sent away to the Black Sea. FTP, name this Eugene
Delacroix painting showing the author of the Metamorphoses in the land
of the titular barbarian tribe. {Xerxes} or {Serse} In the aria “Piu
Che Penso,” the mezzo-soprano title character promises his general
Ariodate that his daughter will have a royal husband, but in “Crude
Furie,” he throws a temper tantrum when learning that his love object,
Ariodate’s daughter Romilda, has married his brother Arsamene instead.
This baroque opera opens with the title character singing to a beloved
tree in “Ombra Mai Fu,” which despite having a Larghetto tempo
direction, has become known to churchgoers as Handel’s famous Largo.
FTP, identify this opera about the titular historical Persian king.
Monument to {Peter the Great} (accept {Peter I} Romanov) or The
{Bronze Horseman} The laurel wreath-wearing head of the figure
depicted was sculpted by an assistant named Marie-Ann Collot. The
subject points his hand out towards the river it faces as a symbol of
his yearning for progress, while a snake, sculpted by Fyodor Gordyev,
rests under the hooves of the subject’s horse, representing the
obstacles that the subject had to overcome in his search for reform.
Positioned atop a giant sculpted boulder known as Thunder Rock, it was
primarily designed by Etienne Falconet. FTP, identify this equestrian
monument to a venerated czar, which figures prominently in an
Alexander Pushkin poem. {Kochel} Catalog or {Kochel-Verzeichnis}
Catalog (prompt on “K” or “KV” alone) Originally its first components
were a pair of keyboard minuets in C major and G major, though the
newest major revision, performed by Weinmann, Sievers, and Giegling
added another minuet, an Andante, and two Allegro’s, all of which were
included in the Notebook for Nannerl. Its 25th entry, a series of
variations on the song “Willem von Nassau,” was likely the only of the
composer’s works to be written in Amsterdam. Section 113 marks the
first of his seventeen divertimenti, while 300i now refers to his
Piano Sonata in A Major, which contains the famous “Rondo alla Turca.”
FTP, identify this 626 piece catalog of Mozart’s compositions, named
for its German indexer. {El Greco} or Domenikos {Theotocopoulos}
Perhaps the most studied of his few forays into sculpture is his
companion pair of polychromed wood nudes commonly identified as
Pandora and Epimetheus. The baptism of Jesus, the allegory of a
Christian knight, and an adoration scene cover the three panels of his
early Modena Altarpiece, while his renditions of Christ Driving the
Traders from the Temple mirror the Church’s aggressive pursuit of
heresy. The miniaturist Giulio Clovio, the poet Felix Paravicino, and
this artist’s fur-wearing mistress Jeronima de las Cuevas were notable
portrait subjects of this 16th Century painter of St. Martin and the
Beggar and the chaotic Vision of St. John, which shows the opening of
the fifth seal of the apocalypse. FTP, name this mannerist who painted
a gloomy landscape of his hill-covered home city in View of Toledo.
{Coppelia} The dance that precedes the finale of its first act and
follows the “Ballad of the Ear of Corn” and the “Variations on a
Slavonic Theme” marks the first ever use of a czardas in a ballet. In
the corresponding plot action, the Burgomeister leads a dance of
couples in the village square while the male protagonist is spurned by
his love, who thinks he is in love with the titular woman instead. Act
II begins in the shop of a mysterious doctor, who also bears the name
of a Tales of Hoffman character, and sees him and the male lead,
Franz, being tricked by Swanilda into thinking that the title
character has come to life. FTP, name this Leo Delibes ballet about
Franz’s infatuation with a mechanical doll. {Orpheus} James Barry
painted this character “instructing a savage people,” while Henry
Ryland painted him as a youth surrounded by deer in a forest, and
George Frederick Watts made a prolific series of renditions of him.
Agnolo Bronzino painted a nude portrait of Cosimo I de Medici in the
image of this character, who can be seen sitting on a rock on a grassy
meadow across the lake from a smoking castle in a Nicholas Poussin
landscape featuring him and his lover. Emile Levy showed his violent
death, while both John Waterhouse and Gustave Moreau painted graphic
scenes of nymphs discovering his severed head afterwards. FTP,
identify this character from classical myth, namesake of a colorful
French art movement led by Robert Delaunay, and the lyre-playing
husband of Eurydice. {Object} or {Luncheon in Fur} or {Breakfast in
Fur} or {Fur-Lined Teacup} or Le {Dejeuner en Fourrure} The largest of
this work’s three pieces has a diameter of 9 3/8 inches. An anecdote
tells how its construction was the response to a comment made by Pablo
Picasso during a tea date, when the artist showed him a copper
bracelet that had been lined with sealskin. A standout piece at the
Museum of Modern Art’s 1937 Surrealist Exhibition, this work is often
critically acclaimed for the contrast between the both opulent and
grossly unappetizing appearance the artist added to a trio of common
dining objects through her use of a fuzzy lining on the pieces of this
arrangement. FTP, name this Meret Oppenheim creation consisting of a
plate, spoon, and tea cup, all covered in hair. The {Triumph of
Bacchus} or Los {Borrachos} or The {Drinkers} The bearded man shown in
profile on the right edge of this painting is preoccupied talking to
the shadowy man above him, who leans down and starts to remove his
hat. Towards the center, a trio of scruffy men huddles together and
poses: the man on the left wears a hat askew, the one on the right
crouches and is covered by his brown cloak and holding a glass, and
the one in the center sheepishly sticks his head between them to get
in the picture. Another man, wearing a sheathed dagger on his back,
kneels down to be crowned with a garland by a distinctly pale Greek
figure sitting near a pitcher and on top of a keg. Located in the
Prado, this is, FTP, what Diego Velasquez scene of a wine god and a
group of inebriated men? {Weather Report} Its final incarnation saw
the addition of Victor Bailey and Omar Hakim and the recording of
Procession and another album named after the Porgy and Bess character,
Sportin’ Life. However, their last release, This is This, saw former
drummer Peter Erskine return for a final hurrah. 8:30, Night Passage,
and the experimental Mr. Gone are recordings from this group’s most
popular lineup, which included Erskine and electric bass standout Jaco
Pastorious, and saw their biggest hit piece, 1977’s “Birdland.” FTP,
Joe Zawinul and Wayne Shorter headed what jazz fusion supergroup with
a meteorological name? {Songs of a Wayfarer} or {Lieder Eines
Fahrenden Gesellen} The angst-ridden third section of this work
describes both the narrator’s feeling of a metaphorical knife wound in
his heart and a temptation to physically stab himself. In its final
movement, a funeral march plays as the singer finds rest under a
linden tree, but not before a motif from the horns reminds him of his
love object’s two blue eyes. This four movement work opens with a
march marking his love’s wedding to another man, and was inspired by
an early bout of unrequited love the composer had for Johanna Richter.
The composer’s later Titan Symphony incorporated melodies from, FTP,
what poetically accompanied song cycle for voice and orchestra in
which Gustav Mahler describes himself as a lovelorn journeyman? {Queen
Anne} Style or {Queen Anne} Revival A residence in Newport, Rhode
Island made for William Watts Sherman is cited as the first appearance
of this style in the U.S. That house’s designer was the New York
architect of the Buffalo State Hospital, Henry Hobson Richardson. The
Stick style and another form named for Charles Eastlake were variants
of the American school of this style, which was first popularized in
England by Richard Norman Shaw. Wrap-around porches with turned
spindles, wall masonry in contrasting textures, bay windows, sometimes
using stained glass, and prominent, asymmetrical gables and towers
were trademarks of houses designed in this decorative style, which
replaced the Second Empire and Gothic Revival styles in the late 19th
Century. FTP, identify this high Victorian architectural style
actually named after a female Stuart monarch. Angelica {Kauffmann} A
self portrait shows this painter in white, standing between a woman in
red holding sheet music and a desperate looking woman in blue holding
a palate, thus symbolizing hesitation between the arts of music and
painting. While in the service of Joseph II, this artist rendered a
scene from the Aeneid, Aeneas Mourning the Death of Pallas, and
painted a portrait of Goethe a year later. However, a painting showing
the mother of the Gracchus brothers is the most popular work by this

